The Project Gutenberg eBook of Correlated courses in woodwork and
mechanical drawing, by Ira. S. Griffith, A.B.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Correlated courses in woodwork and mechanical drawing

Author: Ira. S. Griffith, A.B.

Release Date: May 18, 2022 [eBook #68118]

Language: English

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Harry Lamé and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORRELATED COURSES IN
WOODWORK AND MECHANICAL DRAWING ***



  Transcriber’s Notes

  Texts printed in italics and boldface have been transcribed between
  _underscores_ and =equal signs respectively. Small capitals have been
  replaced with ALL CAPITALS. The caret ^ indicates a superscript
  character.




[Illustration]




  CORRELATED COURSES
  IN
  WOODWORK
  AND
  MECHANICAL DRAWING

  By IRA S. GRIFFITH, A. B.

  Assistant Professor of Manual Arts, Bradley Polytechnic Institute,
  Peoria, Illinois.

  Author of “Essentials of Woodworking,” “Woodwork for Amateur
  Craftsmen,” “Projects for Beginning Woodwork and
  Mechanical Drawing,” and “Advanced
  Projects in Woodwork.”

  [Illustration]

  THE MANUAL ARTS PRESS
  PEORIA, ILLINOIS


  COPYRIGHT
  IRA S. GRIFFITH
  1912




PREFACE.


The author wishes to state that the basis of the following courses rests
more upon the art or practice of teaching manual training than upon the
theory. It is the result of carefully prepared plans executed under
public school conditions by the author himself, covering a period of
some nine years of experimentation. Wherever plans, or theory, were
found producing results which common sense indicated plainly were not
for the pupils’ highest good, practical expediency supplanted theory.

If manual training practice in the two upper grammar grades has merited
criticism it has been because school men have not taken its subject
matter seriously enough.

It is too much to hope that results can be achieved that are truly
educative, when a shop, however well equipped, is turned over to a
teacher but slightly experienced in, and appreciative of, the “finer
points” of the subject matter to be dealt with. Loose and unorganized
efforts in any line of work cannot become educative, it matters not what
fine spun theories may be offered as proof to the contrary. Indeed, much
positive injury may be done.

If the present demand for vocational training teaches manual training
anything, it is that the subject matter of manual training must receive
more serious attention. The aims of manual training and vocational
training, in one sense, are not so very different; both seek, or should,
to assist the boy to become a “thinking doer.” The distinction is mainly
a matter of “direction” and of allotment of time, with possibly a slight
difference in the placing of the emphasis on one or the other of the
words “thinking doer.”

We do not mean to imply that manual training and vocational training are
the same, but we do mean to say that the educative value of any shop
training, whether given from the point of view of general culture or of
special preparation for life’s work, is evidenced in the attitude which
pupils are allowed to assume toward their work. Incorrect and slovenly
habits of thinking and doing have no more place in manual training than
in vocational training. Organization of subject matter is as essential
in manual training as in any other line of endeavor.

Among other things, it is the author’s hope that the book may offer some
suggestions that will help to bring about a better understanding of the
relation of the high school and grade school manual training. The
arrangement and division of the subject matter and the grouping of the
problems represent one method of attack.

The employment of skilled instructors in both grade and high school and
the making of the work of the upper grammar grades serious mechanically
rather than merely “expressional” will wait in many communities upon the
initiative of the school authorities.

Normal school students will find the outline representative of a manual
training practice that is being carried on in some schools that are
reputed to be progressive.

Finally, it is expected that the book will prove helpful to young
instructors in their first year of teaching, assisting them over many of
the petty details which spell success or failure in varying degree,
which otherwise would not be foreseen.

  IRA S. GRIFFITH

Oak Park, Ill., June, 1912.

  For the convenience of the teachers, the drawings used in “Projects
  for Beginning Woodwork and Mechanical Drawing” and “Advance Projects
  in Woodwork” are printed in this book. The notes and working
  directions, however, are not included. The inking of the drawings and
  the making of the perspectives in both of these books is the work of
  Mr. George Gordon Kellar.




CONTENTS


  PART I--ORGANIZATION                                                 5

  CHAPTER I--FOREWORD--AIMS                                            7

  CHAPTER II--CLASSIFICATION AND ARRANGEMENT OF TOOL OPERATIONS, for
  Grades 7, 8, 9, 10; Discussion                                      12

  CHAPTER III--CLASSIFICATION AND ARRANGEMENT OF ELEMENTS OF
  MECHANICAL DRAWING, for Grades 7, 8, 9; Discussion                  22

  CHAPTER IV--SHOP ORGANIZATION--Location of Shops; Division and
  Allotment of Time; Informational and Related Matter Pertaining to
  Woodwork and Mechanical Drawing; Structural and Decorative
  Design; Shop Excursions; Stock Bills; Estimating Cost of
  Material; Standardizing Materials and Tools; Records, Forms of
  Reports, Grading Work; Shop Conduct; The Lesson; Maintenance        29

  CHAPTER V--EQUIPMENT--Size of Classes; Lockers; Bench and Tool
  Equipment for Grade Center; Individual Tools; Equipment for
  Mechanical Drawing, Grade Center; High School Joinery Shop; High
  School Bench and Tool Equipment                                     73


  PART II--LESSON OUTLINES                                            89

  CHAPTER VI--LESSON OUTLINES FOR GRADE VII                           91

  CHAPTER VII--LESSON OUTLINES FOR GRADE VIII                        110

  CHAPTER VIII--LESSON OUTLINES FOR GRADE IX                         130


  PART III--WORKING DRAWINGS                                         133

  CHAPTER IX--DRAWINGS OF PROJECTS, for use in Grades VII and VIII.
  Group I--Squaring up stock surfaced on two sides to thickness.
  Group II--Squaring up stock surfaced on two sides, continued.
  Group III--Squaring up Rough Stock. Group IV--Working Curves.
  Group V--Duplicate Parts. Group VI--Design. Group VII--Groove
  Joints--Applications. Group VIII--Cross-lap Joints--Applications   135

  CHAPTER X--DRAWINGS OF PROJECTS, for use in High Schools. Group
  IX--Mortise-and-tenon Joints, Miter Joint, Glue Joint, Modeling
  Exercise--Applications. Group X--Dovetail Joints, Rabbeted and
  Grooved Joints--Applications                                       187




PART I.

ORGANIZATION.


CHAPTER I.

FOREWORD--AIMS


=Foreword.= It is assumed that woodworking and mechanical drawing have
subject matter and that it is desirable to have an orderly arrangement.
Such an assumption may seem unwarranted to some--to those who labor in
private institutions where the instruction is individual or nearly so.
It is believed, however, that to teachers of these subjects in the
public schools, where for economic reasons, classes of considerable
numbers must be cared for, the necessity for a careful selection and
arrangement of subject matter is very evident.

It has taken some years for the manual training movement to recover from
the extremes into which the late psychology and child study movement had
led it. The exaltation of the “individual” and the reign of the
“self-expressionist,” it would seem, is about over. Not that this latter
movement was an evil--far from it. Its influence was needed and came
none too soon. Like other great movements, however, it led some teachers
to extremes, causing them to overlook the good in the old with the
result that the new alone has proven no more desirable than the old
alone. The pendulum of opinion is returning and in not a few important
places, is already swinging to the other extreme. It is for manual
training teachers to try to determine by an exchange of ideas where the
sanest position lies.

In this discussion, we should ever keep in mind that the American public
school system is maintained mainly to prepare boys and girls for good
and useful citizenship; that this is a democracy in which neither
individual nor class is to be exalted unduly and that our system of
education must result neither in the chaos of anarchy nor in the dull
formalism of a despotism. To the writer it appears that manual training
as practiced before the psychologist took possession was quite typical
of the countries from which its influence came, Russia and
Sweden-formalism. Under the influence of the most radical of the
psychologists, manual training became synonymous with educational
anarchy.

The best American citizenship cannot be developed by means of either the
new alone or the old alone. There must be due attention paid to the
development of the individual but that same individual must learn that
he is but one of many and that he must do some things because they make
it possible for all to enjoy equal rights and privileges. With this
thought in mind, irrespective of any consideration of economic
advantages, orderly arrangement of subject matter and class instruction,
made necessary in large schools, must be looked upon as helpful rather
than harmful in the preparation of the individual for citizenship.

Superintendent L. D. Harvey has said:

  Members of society may be roughly classed into four groups: those who
  think without doing; those who do without thinking; those who neither
  think nor do; and those who think and do because of their thinking.
  This fourth class comprise the productive, constructive, organizing
  element of society. It is the function of the public schools to
  produce members of this fourth class. It must be evident to all that
  for the production of a thinking and doing individual the two forms of
  activity should be carried on side by side; the doing growing out of
  the thinking, and the thinking made clear and definite thru the doing.

In this statement the writer sees the proper relation of those two
essential elements that make manual training valuable as a school
subject--the thought element and the element of skill. Manual training
suffered by having the one--skill--unduly emphasized when our European
importations were made. Recently, it has suffered by having the
other--the thought side--unduly magnified. Both of these elements are
important.

In the author’s experience the practical application of a system that
would make the most of each of these elements has been a source of no
little disappointment. Effort in one direction seemed always to result
in a sacrifice in the other. That is, when the thought side was
emphasized there was a falling off in the accuracy of the results. When
skill was magnified it was attained only with a sacrifice of the thought
element. With many misgivings the conclusion was reached that the
introduction of original thinking on the part of the pupil must mean
somewhat of a sacrifice on the skill side. Concerning this phase of the
subject Professor Richards writes:

  In order to develop in the highest degree independence of thought and
  power of initiative the pupil must be given opportunities for
  determining ends and working out means. Only in this way is the
  natural cycle of mental activities--thinking, feeling and doing--fully
  realized and made effective. The practical realization of this
  principle means, of course, a distinct problem of instruction. The
  problem is essentially one of proportion and balance between freedom
  of expression on the one side and skill and mastery of process on the
  other. Extreme emphasis on the one leads inevitably to a class of
  crude and ill-considered products while attention restricted to the
  other results in mere drill and formalism.

Further, in “THE MANUAL TRAINING TEACHER,” Charles L. Binns, an
Englishman just returned from a trip thru the United States, writes of
manual training in the grades as follows:

  The lack of exactness is the main defect of American manual training.
  But there are many compensations to be balanced against this, and
  these arise chiefly, in my opinion, from the fact that the teacher is
  allowed more liberty to follow his own judgment in teaching the
  subject than is the case here. He has more scope for exercising his
  initiative, with the result that he retains the freshness of interest
  and enthusiasm for his work that our own stereotyped and restricted
  schemes do much to quell. There is a fine spirit of free activity,
  eager interest, and industry permeating most of the manual training
  classrooms. Even the inferior work is done with a happy glow of
  achievement that half excuses it. * * * To emphasize unduly the aim of
  rigid mechanical accuracy generally means a sacrifice of the thought
  side of the work. Those qualities which lead eventually to the
  realization of the pupil’s highest powers--such qualities as
  intelligent self direction; an alert resourceful attitude of mind; and
  power to plan means to an end--are too valuable to lose for such an
  aim. * * * At the same time a system of handwork that ignores a
  reasonable standard of accuracy does not count for much. In the course
  of my visits I found more than once not only an almost entire
  disregard for exactness in the work of the boys, but also an almost
  entire neglect on the teacher’s part to strive for it. Something may
  be said for a method which grants the pupils liberty to express
  themselves freely in their work, if the results are critically
  examined and the errors pointed out, but to accept and pass
  complacently work manifestly inferior is quite inexcusable. There is
  an element of haste about some of the work which may account for some
  of this.

More recently Dr. Georg Kerschensteiner the eminent German authority of
Munich while on a tour of the United States is quoted by the “MANUAL
TRAINING MAGAZINE” as criticising our manual training strongly, saying:

  He could not see why children are encouraged to make big pieces of
  furniture before they can square up a piece of wood properly or make a
  single joint of the type that must be multiplied many times in the
  piece of furniture, if it is properly constructed. From this statement
  it must not be concluded that his pedagogy is of the dried out kind.
  On the contrary he stated with marked emphasis that the first
  requisite in training for skill is to cultivate joy in work. “It is in
  that way that we appeal to the heart,” and “it is only when the
  feelings are brought into action that we can most truly educate.”

We may conclude from this brief statement of the situation that it is
desirable to organize and have courses in our manual training and
mechanical drawing and that whatever system is adopted it must make
allowance for emphasis upon both the thought element and upon skill.


=What System Shall We Use.= It is pretty generally conceded that manual
training as exemplified by the Russian system of joint making and the
Swedish system of model making fails to lead forth the powers of the
child to the fullest extent. The educational theory, now generally
accepted, that interest is the indispensable basis of every method of
education is sufficient to condemn the Russian system so far as its
application in non-technical schools is concerned, while Swedish Sloyd,
unmodified, is weak in that it fails to take into account the reflective
phase of interest, namely, the power of self-initiative. Extreme
“educational manual training’s” greatest weakness lies in its undue
emphasis upon the thought element resulting in too great sacrifice of
that other equally important element, skill or accuracy. The manual
training movement is to be congratulated in that all signs now seem to
point to its speedy delivery from the hands of these latter extremists.
Is it too much to hope that out of our past experiences with the joint
making Russian system with its admitted disciplinary value, the Swedish
model making with its effort to utilize the energy of the worker toward
useful products, and the self expression of the pedagogical movement
with its attendant elements of interest and initiative there may come a
manual training practice that shall be marked by a combination of the
best of these elements with a consequent elimination of the weaknesses
of each?

The outline of study suggested in the Illinois State Course of Study,
credit for which is due mainly to Professor Charles A. Bennett, the
chairman of the committee on manual training in woodwork, has proven a
source of very great help to the writer in his efforts to properly
present the subject matter of woodwork to his pupils. The introduction
to this course is well worth repeating and is in substance as follows:

  Any course in woodworking worthy of a place in the eighth and ninth
  grades of public school work should meet the following requirements:

  1. It should arouse and hold the interest of the pupils.

  2. Correct methods of handling tools should be taught so that good
  technique may be acquired by the pupils.

  3. Tool work should be accompanied by a study of materials and tools
  used in their relations to industry. Special attention should be
  given to the study of trees--their growth, classification,
  characteristics and use.

  4. Drawing should be studied in its relation to the work done.

  5. The principles of construction in wood should be taught thru
  observation, illustration and experience.

  6. At least a few problems should be given which involve invention or
  design or both, thereby stimulating individual initiative on the part
  of the pupils.

  The course is arranged in groups, each group representing a type of
  work. These groups are given in the order of procedure. The teacher is
  expected to provide problems of the greatest value educationally. This
  means that the things to be made should be worth making and that the
  process of making them should be interesting to the student.

  From this it follows that the things to be made must come to the pupil
  in an order which gives reasonable consideration to the difficulties
  to be encountered in making them.

Our outline will aim to present the work so as to meet the conditions
specified above. It has been thoroly tested over a period of years in
public school work. It follows the group plan. The advantages of the
group system are distinct. It permits class instruction and therefore
minimizes the amount of demonstrating and talking that the instructor
must do by preventing needless repetition. By grouping a number of
projects having similar tool operations it permits a boy to satisfy his
individual needs without interfering with the orderly presentation of
the subject matter. It provides work for the fast worker of an
interesting and profitable nature until the slow worker completes the
minimum requirement. It provides for the “repeater,” who often has to
repeat, not because of poor work in manual training but because of poor
work in academic studies, by giving him choice of different models upon
which to work. In general, the group plan possesses the manifest
advantages of class instruction at the same time making allowance for
the individuality of the worker.


CHAPTER II.

CLASSIFICATION AND ARRANGEMENT OF TOOL OPERATIONS FOR GRADES 7, 8, 9,
AND 10.


WOODWORK. GRADE VII.

Time: 2¹⁄₂ hours per week.

GROUP I. Squaring up Mill-planed Stock. (No definite dimensions but to
be square and as large as the stock will allow.)

Time: 1 week.

  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------
       STOCK     |       PROCESSES      |     TOOLS     |    PROJECTS
  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------
  Soft wood      |Edge planing          |Jack-plane     |
  S-2-S          |Testing for uniformity|Try-square     |
  ³⁄₄″ × 6″ × 12″|of width              |(Block-plane?) |Cutting-board
                 |End planing           |               |
  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------

GROUP II. Squaring up Mill-planed Stock. (Definite dimensions.)

Time: 3 weeks.

  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------
                 |Surface smoothing     |(Smooth plane?)|
  Soft wood      |Gaging                |Marking-gage   |
  S-2-S          |Measuring             |Rule           |Counting-board
  ³⁄₄″ × 4¹⁄₄″ × |Lining                |Knife          |
  10¹⁄₂″         |Back-sawing (parallel |Back-saw       |Hat-rack
  ³⁄₄″ × 2³⁄₄″ × |to line)              |Brace and bits |Key-rack
  18¹⁄₂″         |Boring                |Pencil-gage    |
                 |Chamfering            |               |
  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------

GROUP III. Squaring up Rough Stock.

Time: 4 weeks.

  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------
                 |Surface leveling, etc.|Straight-edge  |Ring-toss
  Soft wood      |Crosscut-sawing       |Winding sticks |Spool-holder
  Rough          |Rip-sawing            |Crosscut-saw   |Game-board
  1″ × 8″ × 8″   |Sandpapering          |Rip-saw        |Laundry-
                 |                      |               |register
  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------

GROUP IV. Working Curves.

Time: 3 weeks.

  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------
                 |                      |               |Sleeve-board
  Soft wood      |Getting out stock     |Steel square   |Bread-board
  S-2-S          |Curve sawing          |Turning-saw    |Cake-board
  ³⁄₄″           |First use of chisel?  |Chisel?        |Scouring-board
                 |Spokeshaving          |Spokeshave     |Coat-hanger
  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------

GROUP V. Fastening with Nails and Screws. Duplicate Parts.

Time: 6 weeks.

  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------
                 |                       |             |Nail-box
  Soft wood      |Duplicate parts        |Hammer       |Polishing-box
  S-2-S          |Nailing                |Nailset      |Knife-box
  ³⁄₈″, ¹⁄₂″,    |Setting nails          |Screwdriver  |Bird-box
  ³⁄₄″           |Fastening with screws  |             |Broom-holder
                 |                       |             |Bench-hook
  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------

GROUP VI. Appreciation in Design. Structural, Decorative.

Time: Remainder of school year.

  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------
                 |                        |             |Table-mats
                 |                        |             |Thermometer-
  Soft wood      | Structural design      |             |back
  S-2-S          | Decorative design      | Stains      |Calendar-back
  ³⁄₈″, ¹⁄₂″     | Outlining              | Brushes     |Letter-holder
                 | Staining               | Wax         |Bill-file
                 | Waxing                 |             |Handkerchief-
                 |                        |             |box
                 |                        |             |Glove-box
  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------


GRADE VIII.

Time: 2¹⁄₂ hours per week.

GROUP VII. Groove Joints. Woodfinishing.

Time: 12 weeks.

  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------
       STOCK     |       PROCESSES      |     TOOLS     |    PROJECTS
  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------
  Exercise piece |Exercise--            |Chisel         |Exercise piece
  Soft wood      |Chiseling grooves     |Mallet         |Book-rack
  close grained  |Sawing to fit         |               |Necktie-rack
  3¹⁄₄″ × 10¹⁄₂″ | Fitting parts        |               |Magazine-rack
  Any thickness  |Applications--        |               |Foot-stool
  to reduce to   |                      |               |Wall-rack
  ³⁄₄″.          |                      |               |Wall-shelf
  Application--  |                      |               |Desk-shelves
  Chestnut, S-2-S|                      |               |Square taboret
  ³⁄₈″, ³⁄₄″, 1″.|                      |               |Stool
  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------

GROUP VIII. Cross-lap Joint.

Time: 12 weeks.

  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------
  Exercise piece |Exercise--Cross-lap   |Glue           |Exercise piece
  --Soft wood,   |joint                 |Hand clamps    |Book-trough
  close grained  |Applications          |               |Cluster drop-
  1³⁄₄″ × 10¹⁄₂″ |                      |               |light
  Any thickness  |                      |               |Desk-light
  to reduce to   |                      |               |Calendar-mount
  ³⁄₄″.          |                      |               |Hall-rack
  Application--  |                      |               |Picture-frame
  Chestnut, S-2-S|                      |               |Octagonal
  ³⁄₈″, ³⁄₄″, 1″.|                      |               |taboret
                 |                      |               |Plate-rack
                 |                      |               |Pedestal
  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------


HIGH SCHOOL.

GROUP IX. Joinery. Board and Framed Structures. (Accompanied by
Mechanical Drawing ³⁄₄ hour per day.)

(Time: 1¹⁄₂ hours per day.) (18 weeks.)

  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------
       STOCK     |       PROCESSES      |     TOOLS     |    PROJECTS
  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------
                 |                      |               |India stool
                 |                      |               |Umbrella-stand
                 |                      |               |Taborets
  Close          |Exercises--           |Jointer        |Arm-chair,
  grained        |Mortise-and-          |Smooth-plane   |(simplified)
  wood           |tenon, keyed,         |and full tool  |Side-chair,
  Rough or       |blind                 |set.           |(simplified)
  Mill-planed    |Miter                 |Individual edge|Leg-rest
                 |Modeling              |tools, irons   |Magazine-stand
  ¹⁄₄ sawed      |Glue joint            |and chisels, if|Small tables
  White oak      |Applications--        |possible       |Book-trough
  S-2-S          |                      |Band-saw       |Piano-bench
                 |                      |Jig-saw        |Foot-stools
                 |                      |               |Telephone-stand
                 |                      |               |and seat, etc.
                 |                      |               |etc.
  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------

(Benchwork in Metal 18 weeks.) (Accompanied by Freehand Drawing and
Design ³⁄₄ hour per week.)

GROUP X. Cabinet-Making. Paneled Structures. (Optional and on a par with
other advanced courses in shopwork.) (36 weeks.)

  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------
                 |                      |               |Music-cabinet
                 |                      |               |Chafing-dish
                 |                      |Combination    |stand
                 |Exercises--           |plane          |Desks, Tables
                 |Drawer                |Band-saw       |Book-cases
                 |construction          |Circular saw   |Chests, Screens
                 |Door construction     |Jointer,       |Clocks
  Various woods  |                      |machine        |Shaving-stand
                 |Hinging               |Planer, machine|Beds, Settee
                 |Locking               |Mortise machine|Porch-swing
                 |Applications--        |Shaper         |Mission chairs
                 |                      |Jig-saw        |Medicine-case
                 |                      |               |Dressers, etc.
                 |                      |               |etc.
  ---------------+----------------------+---------------+---------------

Note--Freshmen boys will be divided into two divisions. The first will
take Joinery the first semester, and second division will take
Metalwork. The second semester these divisions will exchange shops.


=Discussion of Woodwork Course.= Column one describes the condition of
the stock when given the pupil. Column two names the new principles
involved in the construction of the articles.

In Group I. stock mill-planed upon two surfaces to the thickness wanted
is given the pupil and he is required to square it up. No definite
dimensions are demanded but the class is given to understand that the
best workman is he who can square up his piece with the fewest shavings
removed. The gage is not used on this piece. The uniformity of width is
determined by the sliding try-square test. The broad surfaces are not
worked by the pupil at all in making this piece. In the first place, the
use to which the piece is to be put demands no fine surface treatment.
In the second place, experience shows that it is advisable to make this
first piece as simple as possible and pupils, at least grammar school
pupils, learn to handle the plane better on edge planing than on surface
planing.

An examination of the headings of the groups suggested for seventh
grade, and the directions given in connection with the problems will
show that each of these groups introduces a new method of squaring up
stock. For illustration, Group I is typical, as to the surface
treatment, of the method used by carpenters and others in preparing
outside finishing material such as cornice and window and door casings,
corner boards, etc. Here mill-marks are not considered objectionable so
that neither broad surface is worked. Group II is typical, as to the
surface treatment, of the method of preparing interior wood trim. One
surface is planed smooth, and straight as to its width, but no effort is
made to take out the wind, nor is the back surface treated at all.
Again, certain kinds of shelving and box construction require that both
broad surfaces be smoothed of their machine or mill-marks but do not
require either surface to be true, depending upon the manner of
fastening the parts together to take out any unevenness. Group V
typifies this method of treatment. Of course, if the stock is badly
curled or cupped no attempt is made to use it for the thickness for
which it was originally intended, tho it is possible to “nail out”
pretty badly warped boards on certain kinds of carpentry work. In
furniture making this is hardly ever possible or advisable. A sleeve
pressing board does not require a face edge or square ends, etc., Group
IV. Group III typifies the standard treatment of which these others are
modifications.

In the third column tools necessary for performing the process are
named. In elementary woodwork the block-plane and smooth-plane may be
omitted, the jack-plane doing the work just as well.

In the Lesson Outlines, section numbers of a text on woodworking to
which the student is referred are given. The text to which the numbers
refer is “_Essentials of Woodworking_.” The necessity for a text to
accompany but not to take the place of the demonstration is well
appreciated by most teachers of manual training. With a text in the
hands of each pupil a lesson may be assigned and the pupil required to
familiarize himself with the text and the illustrations relating to the
subject matter. The use of a text removes most effectually the necessity
for a constant repetition of oral instruction. With a text there is
never any excuse for the pupil bothering the instructor with the
otherwise semi-valid excuse of “I forgot” or “I was absent when the
demonstration was given,” etc., etc.

In Groups VIII and IX will be found exercise pieces. One of the
advantages claimed for the group system is that it permits class
instruction at stated intervals, thus reducing individual instruction to
a minimum. For illustration, a class beginning Group II would continue
to work upon the problems of that group until all but the few
acknowledged failures had completed the work required in that group.
After this the class is to be instructed in the new things of Group III.
This plan to continue thruout the whole course.

The work of the groups will of necessity overlap each other. For, as
soon as a pupil finishes one problem in a group, he begins another
problem in the same group, unless he is the slowest in the class. When
the class is ready to begin a new group we are confronted with the
question of whether to give the instruction belonging to the new group
and allow the boys to proceed with the unfinished work of the old group,
or to start them on problems of the new group. To proceed with the old
is objectionable in that the worker forgets his new instruction before
he has opportunity to apply it. To start new work before finishing the
old is bad in that the pupil will have lost interest in the old when
asked to complete it after finishing the new work. Not to complete the
old at all would be a practice too vicious to be tolerated for a moment.

In the seventh grade this overlapping is not a serious problem, for the
objects being small and quickly finished allow all to finish the old
group before the instruction of the new has faded. In the eighth grade
and high school, however, where the objects are larger, this objection
is a serious one.

As stated before, the aim of the group arrangement is to permit class
instruction at the beginning of each group. To make this effective the
practice and application must follow within a reasonably short time.
Here the “exercise” offers aid.

If ever an exercise piece has a legitimate use, it has it here. The
great objection to exercise pieces lies in their inability to create a
vital interest on the part of the pupil. The writer has made it a
practice to talk over the applications of each exercise and to state
briefly the need for the exercise before beginning it. First, that the
class because of numbers must be instructed all at the same time;
second, that the joints, unlike the simple one-piece objects previously
made cannot be remedied or patched up by reducing the size, as in the
bread board, when lack of knowledge or skill causes errors; third, that
postponing the practice any length of time would be unwise. As the time
required for making the exercises, as arranged in the course outlined
above, is short there has never been a lack of interest either in the
exercise or in the unfinished objects of the old group to which some
must return after completing the exercise.

High school boys begin to take on a different attitude toward exercises
and technique. Their increased knowledge and skill permit applications
requiring considerable time for completing. For this reason all the
exercises are grouped in the fore part of their year.

To the writer it seems unnecessary to apologize for this use of
exercises. He has felt free to utilize parts of any system which seemed
to serve his purpose. He does feel, however, that a long continued
series of exercises in elementary woodworking without application would
be fatal. American school methods have been criticised by Europeans as
being superficial and lacking in thoroness. It may be that in our
eagerness to develop the individual we have made ourselves subjects for
such criticism to a certain extent. We need not fear the introduction of
this small amount of drill and formalism, especially when there is no
loss of interest or incentive. It is impossible to teach a pupil a thing
that is entirely new to him unless he has in his possession a fund of
“known” thru which the unknown may be made known. For this reason
drawings and sketches are plentifully provided.

Experience has shown that better results are obtained, both in the
development of ability to think and ability to do, if the ability to
“do” is given a maximum of attention at the beginning of the course,
opportunities for original thinking being introduced gradually as the
pupils’ knowledge, appreciation, and skill increase. In the beginning
groups the sizes or dimensions are fixed, no variation being permitted
except as poor work necessitates. Requiring all to make the same pieces
in the beginning groups permits comparison of results and the
establishing of standards of accuracy as well as making it possible to
give definite instruction with the minimum of talking.

Another reason for emphasizing technique and processes at the beginning
is that interest is so easily directed. A beginner is interested in
anything. In fact, a few exercises--not more than two or three--might be
introduced at the very beginning without in any way violating the
principle relating to interest previously mentioned. The writer does not
make use of exercises in this way but can understand some of the
advantages secured by so doing.

Having taught the pupil to respect a “working line,” which experience
shows takes the greater part of the seventh year, it will be time to
begin to encourage original thinking on the part of the pupil. This,
because of the pupil’s ignorance of the subject matter, will come
slowly, if satisfactorily. Modifications of the dimensions of the
projects should be the first step. While originality is to be encouraged
in every way it should never be forced at the expense of appreciation.
Appreciation must be developed first. Better a chair of good design and
proportion made after another’s design with appreciation than an
absurdity made after one’s own design and its weaknesses not seen. The
greatest value of design in public school education is expressed well by
Professor Sargent when he says, “For one who will produce a design, a
thousand must know how to select it.”

Pupils possessed of exceptional originality and ability will find ample
opportunity for expression in the group system without hindrance upon
the part of the slower neighbors and without requiring all the
instructor’s time at a sacrifice of the time which the slower pupils
have a right to. The slow pupil has a right to an equal share of the
instructor’s time, and this is not always easy to give when the
brilliant pupil is to be given individual and advanced instruction as
the systems other than the group system necessitate.

In general, it will be found advisable to hold seventh grade pupils
quite rigidly to the execution of the projects offered. In the eighth
grade pupils should be encouraged to modify existing projects, while in
high school they should be encouraged to “work up” original ideas. By
this time they should have acquired a fair fund of information and some
judgment and appreciation.

A glance at the outline on woodworking will show that the projects in
eighth grade and in high school are most all of such a nature as to
demand considerable repetition of processes. For illustration, in the
making of the taboret there are eight dado joints. We have heard so much
of the non-educational value of repeated processes that one may be
inclined to question the arrangement of a course which introduces but
two joints in the course of a year’s work, as is done in the eighth
grade of this outline. In view of the fact that very many courses
introduce the glue joint, mortise-and-tenon, etc., in the eighth grade
it may be well for the writer to state his point of view. It is this:
The highest educational value comes not from many joints put to the
pupil in such rapid succession that he has not time for the acquirement
of a fair degree of proficiency, but rather from the mastery of a few by
repetition so planned as to maintain a keen interest in each joint made.
As a recent writer has said, “There is need for more investigation on
the point that repeated processes are non-educational. Doing certain
things until the process becomes automatic sometimes leads one to take
the first step toward a higher freedom.” This, in view of the present
demands of industrial education, is the excuse for offering a few joints
well made rather than many joints with the consequent mechanical
indigestion that usually follows. As soon as the process has become
fairly automatic, or when the joint has been fairly well mastered, then
are we ready to proceed to new fields. In the seventh grade outline the
introduction of new processes is more frequent. This is due to the fact
that the operations are simple and of such a nature, planing for
example, that future work necessitates their frequent repetition.

The accurate use of the chisel is kept until the eighth grade, as is
also accurate sawing to a knife line with the back-saw. It has taken us
a long time to come to a realization that, while the chisel and saw are
simple tools, their proper handling is not simple. A general survey of
the groups for grade seven will show that each is concerned with one of
the various type processes used in squaring up stock, both mill-planed
and rough. In eighth grade the groups are concerned with the accurate
use of the chisel and back-saw in chiseling, or paring, and sawing to
fit.

In Group IX, which is the first year high school work, the pupil may be
expected to give most of his attention to the principles of simple
joinery of board and framed structures with the necessary joints. A full
set of individual edged tools should give the instructor excuse for
demanding a much higher degree of technique than is to be found in the
grades. The pupils will not be perfected in the use of the chisel, saw,
and other tools but they should have acquired enough skill to enable
them to proceed with the work of the mortise and tenon.

Exercise pieces in mortise-and-tenons, miter, modeling and glue joint
belong here. It is possible to arrange the work so that the modeling and
glue joint exercise pieces may be considered under Application. The
modeling exercise may well be a hammer handle, the metal part of which
is to be worked in the metal class the other half of the first year. The
glue joint may well be made upon wood of sufficient size that it may be
used later, such as the taboret top. The mortise-and-tenon and miter,
however, will be most profitable as exercises pure and simple. A
moment’s thought will indicate the reason for making the distinction.

Many courses give modeling in the grades. Modeling to be of value
requires judgment and experience. This a grade pupil has not. The first
year high school is sufficiently early for this kind of work. To place
it earlier is to give the pupil a wrong impression of the requirements
of good modeling, and his later work, in pattern-making for example,
suffers accordingly.

Two machines should be made use of in the first year high school work,
the band-saw and scroll or jig-saw. Both, when properly safeguarded, are
well suited to give the pupil his first acquaintance with machinery.
There is little educational value in further excessive ripping by hand
at this stage of the course.

The cabinet-making course is not to be considered as manual training
_per se_. It is best to make it optional and more purely a trade course,
tho the work may still be individual in its nature. An exercise in
making a small door and one in the making of a drawer will introduce the
student to the use of most of the machinery specified. These exercises
should be detailed so as to involve stock of the same size for each boy.
In this way the machines may be set and all the parts of similar kind
run thru. Classes of considerable size may be taught with the use of the
minimum of machinery. Each boy should, of course, be taught the setting
of the various machines.

After these two exercises, with hinging and locking, the pupils may be
allowed to work out pieces of their own choosing involving these
elements, preparing their own stock, setting their machines, etc. In
this way the “shop” practice, quantity or piece work, is obtained in the
making of the exercises while the application later allows for the
individuality of the pupil.


CHAPTER III.

CLASSIFICATION AND ARRANGEMENT OF ELEMENTS OF MECHANICAL DRAWING FOR
GRADES 7, 8, AND 9.


MECHANICAL DRAWING


GRADE VII.

  Time: 2¹⁄₂ hours per week for 12 weeks.

LESSON I.

  Principles                         Applications

  Straight lines (Use of             Introductory Sheet
  instruments)
  Angles
  Lettering

LESSON II.

  Order of Procedure                 Woodwork Group I.
  Relation of Views
  Blocking out
  Simple Dimensioning
  Scale

LESSON III.

  Foreshortening                     Woodwork Group II.

LESSON IV.

  Geometric Construction--           Geometric Construction Sheet
  Circles, Hexagon, Octagon
  Ellipse

LESSON V.

  Hidden edges                       Woodwork Group III.

LESSON VI.

  Center lines                       Woodwork Group IV.
  Tangents
  Points of tangency
  Cross-sections

LESSON VII.

  Working Drawings                   Woodwork Group V.
  Representing screws and nails
  Broken views

LESSON VIII.

  Working Drawings (continued)       Woodwork Group V.
  Representing screws and nails
  Broken views

LESSON IX.

  Stock Bills                        Woodwork Group V.

LESSON X.

  Figuring costs                     Woodwork Groups I-V.

LESSON XI.

  Appreciation in Design             Woodwork Group VI.
  Structural, Decorative

LESSON XII.

  Templet or patterns                Woodwork Group VI.


GRADE VIII.

  (Time: 2¹⁄₂ hours per week for 12 weeks.)

LESSON I.

  Principles reviewed                Projects or Problems

  Straight lines                     Bennett’s “_Problems in Mechanical
                                     Drawing_”
                                     (Freehand sketches followed by
                                     mechanical drawings.) Group I.

LESSON II.

  Circles                            “_Problems in Mechanical Drawing_”
                                     Group II.

LESSON III.

  Tangents                           “_Problems in Mechanical Drawing_”
                                     Group III.

LESSON IV.

  Planes of projection               “_Problems in Mechanical Drawing_”
                                     Group IV.

LESSON V.

  Review                             “_Problems in Mechanical Drawing_”
  Test problems

LESSON VI.

  Working Drawings                   Woodwork Group VII.

LESSON VII.

  Working Drawings                   Woodwork Group VIII.

LESSON VIII.

  Working Drawings                   Woodwork Groups VII and VIII.

LESSON IX.

  Stock Bills                        Woodwork Groups VII and VIII.

LESSON X.

  Figuring costs                     Woodwork Groups VII and VIII.

LESSON XI.

  Design--Structural, Decorative     Woodwork Groups VII or VIII. (one
                                     piece)

LESSON XII.

  Templet or patterns, Working       Based on Lesson XI above.
  drawing, stock bill and cost.


HIGH SCHOOL

  (Time: ³⁄₄ hour per day for 18 weeks. Freehand Drawing and Design, ³⁄₄
  hour per day, 18 weeks.)

LESSON I.

(3³⁄₄ hours.)

  Lettering                          “_Problems in Mechanical Drawing_”
                                     Group IX.

LESSON II.

  Working drawings                   India stool, etc. See Woodwork
                                     Group IX.

LESSON III.

  Working drawings continued         As above.

LESSON IV.

  Stock bills                        As above.
  Material costs figured

LESSON V.

  Inking                             “_Problems in Mechanical Drawing_”
  Straight lines                     Group I.

LESSON VI.

  Inking, continued,                 “_Problems in Mechanical Drawing_”
  Circles                            Group II.

LESSON VII.

  Inking, continued,                 “_Problems in Mechanical Drawing_”
  Tangents                           Group III.

LESSON VIII.

  Inking, continued,                 “_Problems in Mechanical Drawing_”
  Views                              Group IV.

LESSONS IX AND X.

  Revolution of solids               “_Problems in Mechanical Drawing_”
                                     Group V.

LESSONS XI AND XII.

  Development of prisms and          “_Problems in Mechanical Drawing_”
  pyramids                           Group VI.

LESSONS XIII AND XIV.

  Development of cylinders and cones “_Problems in Mechanical Drawing_”
                                     Group VII.

LESSONS XV AND XVI.

  Intersections                      “_Problems in Mechanical Drawing_”
                                     Group VIII.

LESSONS XVII AND XVIII.

  Isometric                          “_Problems in Mechanical Drawing_”
                                     Group XI.


=Discussion of Drawing Course.= The course in mechanical drawing, like
that in woodworking, is arranged in groups according to the principles
to be developed. The arguments for the group system in woodworking apply
equally to the group system in mechanical drawing.

There has been an aim to correlate the woodworking and mechanical
drawing just as far as the logical presentation of each would allow.
From the concrete and near by to the more general has been the guiding
principle in laying out the course in mechanical drawing as well as in
woodwork. For this reason the seventh grade problems in woodwork have
been utilized to introduce the elementary principles in mechanical
drawing. Even as the pupils of our primary schools learn to read without
being conscious of the “dry bones” of language and spelling back of it,
so, in the teaching of mechanical drawing, the aim is to arouse in the
beginner an interest in the ability to draw and to read drawings, as an
accomplishment, and to inspire him to work, because he sees that there
is something he needs, wants, and must have.

Little or no effort is made in seventh grade drawing to develop
originality. Almost all effort is spent in developing a drawing
technique and a good style. Most all of the pupils’ drawings are made
with plates before them. These they copy, using a different scale,
however. To encourage the pupils to establish a high standard these
drawings have been inked by a draftsman selected because of his
excellence in this line of work.

The drawing of the grammar schools in most places is best taught by the
instructor in woodwork. Extreme care should be taken to see that the
pupils are given the correct method of attack in making a drawing. They
should be made to follow this instruction just as conscientiously as
they are required to attempt correct execution in woodwork. In drawing,
as in woodwork, slovenly habits come handier to some pupils, and, if
allowed to become fixed, they will cause sorrow to the pupil and
misunderstanding later on. In the very first drawing, for example, and
all others, insist on having lightly penciled blocking out lines of
indefinite length--lines that are just visible, that is all. Do not
allow the pupil to form the habit of drawing a heavy line between two
points previously located. It is needless to say that the pencil must be
of good lead, properly sharpened, and kept sharp. It is an excellent
plan to insist that all construction or blocking out lines be left just
as originally drawn, no eraser being used at all. If lightly made, as
they should be, they will be inconspicuous in the finished drawing. They
will be proof positive that the method of procedure has been the correct
one, will save the pupil’s time, and give him a lightness of touch that
will come in to excellent advantage later on. After the drawing has been
laid out in light lines and inspected by the teacher, the lines that
represent outlines of the object can be gone over a second time and made
to stand out.

By the close of the seventh grade a boy ought to be able to read and to
construct simple working drawings of three views properly related. He
will have had all of the simple conventions and should know them by name
with their meanings. While inking is not given a place in either seventh
or eighth grade, the drawings should show a good finish in penciling and
there should be no habits formed that will have to be overcome later.

In eighth grade mechanical drawing, the first four groups review the
principles introduced in the seventh grade. They are in the form of
problems to be solved, however, and thus necessitate thought on the part
of the pupil.

In the solving of these problems a carefully made freehand, dimensioned
working drawing is first required. This, when correct, is followed with
a mechanical drawing, full size and without dimensions. It will be noted
that no attempt has been made heretofore to have the pupils make
freehand working drawings or sketches. It has been the author’s
experience that better results are obtained by introducing the freehand
drawings after the pupil has been taught and has had experience in the
exactness of the mechanical drawing.

The working drawings of this grade introduce no new principles but give
opportunity for practice in more difficult combinations of elements.
They provide opportunity for acquiring greater facility in handling the
instruments which results in drawings that are to be used in the shops.
While the drawings are copied from plates, as in the seventh grade, the
pupil is permitted to modify the designs within certain limitations,
with one problem in original design, structural and decorative.

In high school drawing more time is allowed and the drawing becomes more
of a subject in itself, requiring more and deeper thought on the part of
the pupil. The high school drawing course is complete in itself. The
first four groups are given mainly as problems in inking but they
furnish a review of that part of the eighth grade drawing incidentally.
They also furnish a familiar starting point for the high school work and
make of the high school course a complete whole. High school drawing is
best given by a specialist.

As in the eighth grade, these problems are to be solved and drawn
freehand with dimensions. Afterward they are drawn mechanically and
inked. The inking of problems is specified in only the first four groups
in the outline for drawing. The amount of inking to be done thereafter
will best be determined by the instructor. Too much inking has a
tendency to result in careless penciling. It is for the instructor to
determine when his class is doing its best in both penciling and inking.
The problems of these latter groups are well calculated to necessitate
thought and study and the instructor will do well to make much of this
part of the subject.

The making of high school working drawings is placed early in the course
that they may be ready to use in the shop by the time the exercises in
joint work preparatory to their application, are completed. These
working drawings are to be original as far as possible. Plates of
suitable projects are to be provided to give the necessary starting
points.


CHAPTER IV.

SHOP ORGANIZATION


=1. Location of Shops.= Shops for high school pupils will be located in
or near the high school building. A special effort should be made to
have both wood shop and drawing room placed in suitable environment.
Where manual training has been introduced into high schools with
buildings planned for academic work only, it has been the custom to
place manual training in the basement and drawing in the attic, these
being the only places available for subjects that had yet to prove their
worth. Even today, when it is a well established fact that handwork as a
part of our educational course has not only proven its worth but is
prophesied a greater place in our educational scheme in the form of
industrial training, some school authorities not only place shops in
basements of old buildings but plan new buildings with basement shops.
This is an economy with nothing to justify it but tradition.

In many cities the custom of building basements high out of the ground
serves to mitigate some of the evils, by giving a fair degree of light
and ventilation. Any basement, however, that is formed with a cement
floor directly on the ground will be damp in the spring and fall when
the heating apparatus ceases to force warm air thru the rooms. The
result upon tools, upon wood, and upon the health of those who must
spend their time in such surroundings is not a matter of speculation.

Any subject to be taught to the best advantage must not only be a
subject that will win the respect of the pupils but it must be given
surroundings that will not tend to degrade it in the eyes of the
immature student. Excellent work has been done in basement rooms and
excellent discipline maintained under very adverse conditions but it has
been in spite of these conditions and not because they do not influence
the student unfavorably. In spite of the instructor’s best efforts to
create a feeling of respect toward the basement shopwork similar to that
entertained toward the academic work, pupils in going from the
comfortably furnished rooms above, in which the decorator’s art has
helped to make everything agreeable to the eye, unconsciously assume an
attitude in their first conduct and deportment that places the shop
instructor at a disadvantage.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.

ARRANGEMENT OF HIGH SCHOOL SHOP WITH REFERENCE TO MAIN BUILDING.

GROUND FLOOR PLAN OF POLYTECHNIC HIGH SCHOOL

LOS ANGELES CAL. FRANKLIN P. BURNHAM ARCH’T

From the June, 1908 MANUAL TRAINING MAGAZINE]

The chief objection, aside from cost, to placing shops above ground is
the noise. This objection has been met, and can easily be met by any
competent architect. The accompanying floor plans are indicative. Fig.
1.

In some high schools, the shops are entirely separated from the main or
academic classrooms. This is unsatisfactory, as any one familiar with
high school organization knows. The frequent change of classes after
short periods makes the going from one building to another a matter of
serious moment, especially in our northern winter climate.

Shopwork has won its place fairly in our school courses and it is
encouraging to note an increasing tendency on the part of progressive
communities to place shop and drafting-room in environment calculated to
create a feeling of respect, to give dignity equal to that of other
school subjects, and to provide favorable conditions for the best
working of materials.

In the grammar schools the problem is but slightly different. In a city
of any size, shopwork will need to be given in centers. The alternative
of a shop in each school with an instructor going from shop to shop on
different days of the week is hardly practicable. The equipment of a
shop is a matter of too great cost to have it lying idle part of the
school time. There is added disadvantage in that a peripatetic shop
instructor cannot “keep up” his several shops with divided interest as
well as he can keep up one in which he works constantly.

The best plan is to have a center or shop located favorably for several
neighboring schools and install an instructor in this center. The pupils
are to be sent to him from a sufficient number of schools to occupy his
entire time at this shop.

Here again the basement makes its appeal to school authorities first,
the basement of some one of the grammar schools being utilized for a
shop center. Since almost all of the pupils come from other schools,
there is no excuse, other than economy, in placing grammar school manual
training shops in basements of schools already established. If the high
school shopwork suffers a disadvantage by being placed in basement
rooms, grammar school shopwork suffers more, and with less excuse.

Since domestic science cannot well be taught in basements, and is
objectionable on main floors because of noise and odors, and since there
is no reason for having the laboratories directly connected with any
grammar school building, the best plan is to erect a special building to
house both manual training and domestic science. The cost need not be
great and the building may be erected upon grounds of some one of the
grammar schools. Evanston, Illinois, public schools offer a good
illustration. Figs. 2 and 3.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. EXTERIOR GRAMMAR SCHOOL BUILDING FOR MANUAL
TRAINING AND DOMESTIC SCIENCE, EVANSTON, ILLINOIS.]

[Illustration: FIG. 3. FLOOR PLANS OF BUILDING, EVANSTON, ILLINOIS.]

The proper placing of centers in a community will depend upon the number
of pupils to be cared for, the distance they must travel to get to the
center, and the site available.


=2. Division or Allotment of Time.= Two divisions of time are common in
grammar school shopwork, the one-fourth and the one-half day period once
a week. In some cities manual training is given in sixth, seventh and
eighth grades of the grammar schools. In others it is given in seventh
and eighth grades only. In the former case, to the best of the author’s
information, the period never exceeds one-fourth day each week. In the
latter it very frequently occupies one-half day a week. The outline for
drawing and manual training as given in this book presupposes the
one-half day period. In favor of this period of time are the following:
The pupils go and come to manual training on time out of school hours.
This is a very decided gain and permits the placing of centers so as to
accommodate schools of widely differing locations. Second, more and
better work is accomplished in a one-half day period of one year than in
a one-fourth day period for two years. In the one-fourth day period the
pupil hardly gets his tools set and adjusted when the bell signals him
to begin to “clean up,” resulting in much unprofitable effort. Our
college administrators, who are responsible for originating the short
and infrequent period spread over a long period of months or years, have
long since found that better work and more of it is obtained where the
study is given a more intensive view, the total number of hours for the
course remaining the same but being condensed into less calendar time.

The chief objection offered against the one-half day period is that the
pupil becomes tired, exhausted, and therefore disinterested and
troublesome before the close of the period. Where the full two hours and
a half are devoted entirely to shopwork, especially if the shopwork is
of such a nature as to make little appeal to the interest of the pupil,
this argument is valid. If, however, each period has its recitation on
assigned study and its demonstration on the new work to be presented
there remains but two hours of work requiring the student to be on his
feet and, if the interest is what it should be, very few boys will
complain of fatigue. The writer makes it a custom to give, in the place
of the conventional recess, a short five minute rest period. Boys are
permitted to talk and move about the shop but he has found that as many
boys prefer to continue their woodwork as prefer to rest.

If the one-fourth day period is to be used, it will be necessary to give
recitations and demonstrations on alternate days, and will necessitate
introducing the work lower than the seventh grade. It is hardly
profitable to begin serious, systematic work lower than the seventh
grade, and when it is begun in seventh grade it is hardly possible to
make it serious with a time allotment of less than one-half day each
week.

There is not the same need for recess in shopwork as in academic work. A
five minute rest period is sufficient to permit pupils to make known to
each other their wishes or information. In this way it is possible to
dismiss the pupils ten minutes earlier than they otherwise would be,
thus allowing the morning class extra time for reaching home.

In the high school the time allotment is generally permitted to be
governed by the periods arranged for the academic subjects. The common
arrangement is to give two consecutive periods equal to two of the
recitation periods of the academic subjects for shopwork and another for
drawing each day thruout the week. If the periods are one hour each,
which is unusual in high schools tho common in colleges, but one period
is given to the shop.

Where manual training has been given serious consideration in the
seventh and eighth grades of the grammar schools under competent
instructors it ought to be possible to cover the necessary benchwork in
wood in the first half of the freshman year of the high school. This
will leave the second half for turning or for benchwork in metal,
preferably the latter.

To mechanical drawing the first half of the freshman year of one period
each day should be devoted, followed in the second half by freehand
drawing, perspective and design.

The mechanical drawing of the grammar schools, it will be noted in the
lesson outlines, takes the first twelve weeks or lessons of each year.
Mechanical drawing in grammar schools is usually presented in one of
three ways. First, by having the pupil make his drawing then immediately
make the object drawn in wood, carrying on woodwork and drawing side by
side thruout the year. Second, by having the pupil make the object in
wood first, followed by the drawing. Third, by taking the first ten or
twelve weeks of the year for making up all the drawings of that year,
following this with a continuous application in wood.

After experimenting thru a number of years the writer finds the third
practice possesses many marked advantages. Among other things that make
it more satisfactory are the following: It permits concentration of the
pupil’s attention upon one thing at a time. Where woodwork and drawing
are carried on side by side or even where they alternate the pupil’s
attention and interest are divided. So much more interesting do the
pupils find the woodwork with its freer activity that the drawing
suffers immeasurably, it being almost impossible to get anything like
the proper attitude toward the technique of drawing when the young pupil
is allowed to see the immediate application in wood all around him. The
instructor’s struggles for neatness and accuracy in the drawings are no
match for the barbarous haste of the beginner in his desire to get thru
with the drawing and get at the woodwork. It is impossible to get
concentration on drawing in a woodshop with tools all about and the
knowledge on the part of the pupil that only the drawing separates him
from the tools.

The ideal way would be to have a separate drawing-room and equipment as
in high school. This, however, is impracticable in most grammar schools.
The woodworking teacher being the drawing teacher makes it impossible to
utilize both shop and separate drawing-room to advantage. The fitting up
and heating of rooms that are to be used only part of the school time
makes a separate drawing-room an unwarranted expense in grade schools. A
satisfactory substitute is to utilize the woodshop benches for drawing
benches but to remove all tools, having it distinctly understood that
ten or twelve weeks are for drawing, and that, no matter how many
drawings are produced by a pupil, he will begin no woodwork until the
time allotted to drawing is up. It becomes possible to secure the right
attitude toward the drawing. By this concentration of attention both
drawing and woodwork are the gainers.

Second, it enables the shop instructor to tell what supplies are going
to be needed for the woodwork and to get them delivered in time without
returning from his summer’s vacation several weeks before school begins.
In the twelve weeks of drawing the woodworking tools and equipment can
be looked over and put in order in plenty of time without breaking into
the summer months that belong to the instructor. Where the woodwork
begins at the beginning of school in September the instructor must
either take the fore part of his vacation at the close of school to put
his tools in shape or, if he has them simply cleaned and vaselined by
the pupils and stores them for the summer, he must come back several
weeks before school. This is true whether he does his own sharpening or
has it done, and the advantage in having woodwork begin some weeks later
than school is very manifest.

Third, this latter arrangement gives the pupil an intelligent preview of
the whole year’s work in wood thru the drawings he makes in the first
ten or twelve weeks.

Mechanical drawing, even in the grades, has a right to a clean, quiet,
well lighted room without unnecessary distractions either to the eye or
ear. This, with a definite understanding on the pupil’s part that
drawing technique is the major and the utility of the drawing the minor
consideration, should put the pupil in the right attitude toward his
drawing work and make it possible to secure the best drawings he is
capable of producing. No one, not even a finished draftsman, could
produce good drawings surrounded by the noise and dust of neighboring
woodworkers. Under the alternating system there are always slow pupils
who, if they finish their drawings before they make the application,
must do it while the others are working in wood. Add to the noise and
dust this pupil’s feeling that he too ought to be at his woodwork and
the limit of unfavorable conditions for producing a drawing are reached.
Making the year’s drawings the first twelve weeks of the year enables
one to avoid these unfavorable conditions.

Fourth, this arrangement makes possible a graduated transition from the
quietness and restrictedness of the academic class room to the noise and
greater freedom of the woodshop.

When beginning pupils come to the grammar school manual training shop
for the first time at the beginning of school in September, it is with
an overplus of energy and noise. To reduce these sufficiently to permit
of getting anything like satisfactory results in shopwork, the
instructor is placed at once squarely before a large problem in
discipline. This problem is very greatly simplified by introducing the
pupil to ten or twelve weeks or lessons in mechanical drawing before
beginning the woodwork.

Conditions surrounding a pupil in mechanical drawing classes are very
similar to those he finds in his regular academic classes and he can
readily be brought to understand that quietness, and orderliness with
seriousness of purpose are as necessary a part of his manual training as
of his academic work. After this attitude has been fixed in the pupil’s
mind in connection with his manual training thru the mechanical drawing
when the transition to woodwork is made, where more freedom must be
allowed, the pupil will be better able to distinguish between legitimate
noise and noise that is entirely unnecessary, and between freedom and
license.


=3. Informational and Related Matter Pertaining to Woodwork and
Mechanical Drawing.= Closely related to any subject is a vast fund of
informational matter. If the student is to have an intelligent
understanding of the subject matter, he must be given opportunity to
become acquainted with at least the most important of this related
information.

In the seventh grade the necessary study of tools and processes occupies
the pupil’s time fully. In the eighth grade opportunity offers itself
for introducing such subjects as wood structure, tree growth, lumbering,
and milling. In high school, the pupil should be made familiar with the
most common woods, their classification, characteristics, and uses.

High school pupils should be assigned outside readings on forestry. They
should secure and classify specimens of the more common woods and should
be able to recognize the tree by leaf, fruit, bark, wood and tree form.
See Figs. 4, 5, and 6.

In the grammar grades, mounted specimens should be prepared illustrative
of tree structure, shrinkage, defects, etc. As in the high school,
pupils should be encouraged to seek and prepare specimens illustrative
of the subjects under consideration.

It is now possible to rent or purchase very excellent lantern slides on
forestry, lumbering, milling, etc. Add the use of these to that of the
mounted specimens if at all possible.

The detailed lesson outlines indicate definitely where these subjects
are to be given attention in the course. The pages of the text are also
indicated. The high school library should be provided with the very
excellent bulletins of the United States Department of Agriculture,
Division of Forestry, most of which are for free distribution.


=4. Woodfinishing.= The subject of woodfinishing is treated in a manner
quite similar to that of woodworking. No pieces of woodwork that should
have a finish are ever sent from the shop until they have been treated
to a finish calculated to make them fit for immediate placing in their
future surroundings.

While the general outline of the course in woodwork makes no mention of
woodfinishing, the lesson outline indicates the gradual introduction of
the subject, beginning with the simplest finishes first and terminating
in high school in the rubbed copal varnishes.

[Illustration: FIG. 4. CHART ILLUSTRATING WOOD STRUCTURE.

By T. B. Kidner, October, 1908 MANUAL TRAINING MAGAZINE]

In woodfinishing, as in woodworking, the aim has been to have the pupil
treat the subject in a serious and workmanlike manner. In seventh grade
little woodfinishing is done. The woodworking processes need the
centering of the pupil’s attention, in the first place. Second, the
simple pieces which the beginner is able to make require no finish as a
rule. In one group stain and wax is used. This is the group in which
decorative design is emphasized. In the eighth grade the woodfinishing
problem becomes important. Almost all of the pieces require a finish.

[Illustration: FIG. 5. CHART ILLUSTRATING TIMBER DEFECTS.

By T. B. Kidner, October, 1908 MANUAL TRAINING MAGAZINE]

[Illustration: FIG. 6. CHART ILLUSTRATING PROPERTIES OF TREES.

By T. B. Kidner, October, 1908 MANUAL TRAINING MAGAZINE]

The greatest obstacle to proper woodfinishing lies in the desire of the
pupil to take his piece home as soon as the woodwork is completed.
Unless a definite understanding is had with the class beforehand, proper
woodfinishing is difficult to obtain. Most boys are subject to reason,
so that it is not at all necessary to have woodfinishing slighted or to
resort to makeshifts. The writer makes it a practice to take plenty of
time when the subject of woodfinishing comes up for its first
discussion to explain in detail the commercial methods of finishing fine
furniture, a piano for illustration, counting the different operations
and coatings it will receive and the labor and time expended upon the
finish. A comparison is then made between a finely rubbed finish and the
cheap, sticky, unrubbed finishes of cheap furniture.

Having established in the minds of the pupils the fact that
woodfinishing is an art second to none and that it requires time to do
it well, there is not that impatience that breeds sullen looks when the
woodfinishing is to be begun after the woodwork has been completed. The
pupil will take the woodfinishing as a matter of course and goes about
it in a cheerful and manly spirit.

In grammar schools, woodfinishing has been made as simple as is
consistent with good work. Coming as the boys do but once a week and
each finishing application requiring over night for drying or hardening,
the total time is quite long even with the simple finish of filler,
shellac, and wax. If the pupil wishes a very dark finish, a stain which
requires one or more periods must precede his filler.

In high school, pupils come every day thus permitting the application of
rubbed varnish finishes, either shellac or copal, without unnecessary
loss of time. Here special finishing rooms are necessary.


=5. Structural and Decorative Design.= Among other requirements for a
course in woodwork and drawing as stated in the foreword is this: “At
least a few problems should be given which involve invention or design
or both, thereby stimulating individual initiative on the part of the
pupils.” The present outlines in woodwork and drawing have been planned
with this in mind. In the seventh grade the pupil is given little
opportunity to exercise his initiative in either woodwork or drawing.
The reason for this, as has been previously stated, is a firm belief
that initiative in any subject to be of value must be based upon a fair
knowledge of the subject matter dealt with, its limitations and its
possibilities. In other words, that appreciation must precede invention
or initiative.

With the limited time allowed manual training, at most one-half day each
week in the general educational scheme, a seventh grade beginner has
about all he can well manage in becoming familiar with his subject
matter, with learning to handle his tools and work his material.

But one group in the seventh grade will admit of decorative design.
These problems, Group VI, have purposely been made simple as to
woodwork that the pupil may give most of his attention to the design. In
eighth grade, modifications of outline and dimensions of any project are
permitted where a fair degree of merit is shown. Modifications of joints
or fastenings are not to be made, however, unless a pupil wishes to
transfer a project from some other group into the group in which the
class is working.

In high school the pupil is expected to “work up” in his drawing class
projects original in so far as his ability will permit, subject to
limitations mentioned hereafter.

Eighth grade boys are expected to make at least one application of
decorative design to the pieces of woodwork made. The projects made by
the high school boys are, as a rule, not so well calculated to take
decorative design. Their efforts at decorative design will come later in
connection with the metalwork of the first year.

In high school the design is to be taught by special drawing teachers
who have informed themselves of the limitations of the shop methods when
it comes to applying these designs. It is for the shop instructor to
specify the kind of joint or joints that are to be used and the
material, also the limitations as to decoration. Present methods of
organization in high schools hardly permit of the teaching of shopwork
and design and by the same instructor, which is the ideal way providing,
of course, that the instructor is expert in both. This is a combination
difficult to find. It is gratifying, however, to know that some schools
are insisting that their shop men become informed in design as well as
shopwork.

While these drawings are being worked up in the drafting room the
pupil’s shop periods are given over to the making of the exercise joints
and mastering the principles involved in their making. By the time these
exercises are completed, the working drawing will be completed ready for
use in the shop.

The proper correlation of design and shopwork is not a problem beyond
solution, because of the direct relation of the two departments,
providing there is a strong administrative head able to secure proper
_esprit de corps_. In the grammar schools, however, the problem becomes
less satisfactory of solution by correlation.

The first objection lies in the fact that the regular grade teacher has
both boys and girls to teach and the problems must therefore be the same
for the whole room. The second objection lies in the fact that the
problem in design has to pass thru too many hands before it reaches the
boy. If design is to be taught to the best advantage, it must have the
interest of the teacher and she must have an intelligent understanding
not only of the subject of design but of the particular problem that is
to be presented. The difficulties in the way are not insurmountable
where the drawing supervisor herself presents the problem to the pupils.
Even here, however, one frequently finds the drawing supervisor so much
more interested in the freehand drawing that her dislike for the design
makes her unfitted for such correlation work.

When, however, as is the case in cities, the drawing supervisor must
reach the pupils thru the regular teacher, correlation becomes in most
every instance a farce. The teaching of design is another imposition on
an already overburdened grade teacher. Very seldom does she understand
the problem and it becomes a distasteful subject to be got over in the
easiest way possible. Department teaching in the upper grammar grades
would do much to aid in the correlation of drawing and shop. Until this
is made possible, we can hope for little in the way of results from
grammar school correlation, unless it be in a small system where the
supervisor teaches the children directly.

The whole subject of design as it relates to woodworking is a constant
source of discussion among manual training shop men. Many good teachers
insist that design has no place at all in a course in woodworking.
Others admit that it ought to have a place but feel that the results
obtained do not justify the time spent upon it. Still others approach
the whole field of woodworking from the side of design, tool processes
and organized woodworking subject matter being mere incidents to the
problem in design.

Like every extreme position each of these points of view has good in it,
but there is sufficient error accompanying each to impair the validity
of the conclusions and to make the resulting applications unhappy as
related to ordinary public school conditions.

The whole subject of design as it relates to the manual training shop is
one that has demanded thought on the part of the author. It is one of
those places where teaching theory failed to bring efficiency either in
the results obtained in design or in the reaction upon the boy. He has
been forced to the opinion, from his own experience and from his
observation of the efforts of others to teach design to grammar school
pupils, that the cause for dissatisfaction and discouragement is due to
our insistence upon one and only one method of presentation--the
inductive or synthetic.

In judging results we must consider the results obtained from every
member of a class and the good each boy has got out of his experience.
This efficiency test most effectively excludes the exhibition of a few
“accidentals” as evidence that our method is the correct one. There is
no reason why design should seek justification on any ground other than
that offered by other subjects.

Inductive or synthetic teaching of design has its place; so also has the
deductive or analytic. Happily those educators who insist on the use of
one method or the other only are becoming few. In other subjects we are
finding that the teaching results which demand the respect and approval
of educators of safe and sane judgment are obtained by the use of both
methods interchangeably. There is no formal notice when one is to be
used or the other--whichever method fits the occasion is used without
apology. This is right; to do otherwise is to sacrifice the boy or girl
for the sake of the method. We are all agreed that the child is the more
important consideration. In fact, some psychologists tell us that
induction and deduction are one and the same process, the difference
being merely a matter of emphasis. It is this difference in placing the
emphasis that we seek to discuss.

Our methods in the high school have made much of the inductive. This is
right. Pupils of high school and college age are ready for this method,
tho our high school pupils often would profit by having a little less of
this with more of the deductive.

However, when it comes to grammar school teaching, the maximum of use
has to be made of the deductive or analytic method. This is acknowledged
in the academic subjects. Woodworking when taught so as to meet the
efficiency test that is applied to academic teaching also makes use of
this method mostly. Our design, however, has always been taught by the
inductive or synthetic method, no one seeming to have the temerity to
make use of any other. As a result we find the views of design in the
grammar school as stated above. Those who advocate it urge the
“accidentals” as sufficient justification. Those who reject it base
their argument on the fact that results based on a few accidentals will
not satisfy the same efficiency test that is applied to other subjects.

Experience has shown, at least to the author’s satisfaction, that the
deductive or analytic method when given maximum emphasis with beginners
in design is all that is needed to bring the results up to a standard
equal to that of other subjects. It is the rational method of presenting
any subject to beginners.

The terms deductive and inductive have such wide application that it may
be well to specify more particularly just what we mean. A concrete
illustration will suffice to show the distinction we seek to make
between what we choose to designate the deductive or analytic and the
inductive or synthetic methods.

Suppose we wish to have a class, with little or no information about the
subject, design a booklet to meet certain specified conditions. Three
distinct stages of progress manifest themselves in what we shall call
the complete method. First, the pupils must be given information bearing
upon the problem. Second, they must be given experience in handling
problems of that type. Third, they will utilize this information and
experience in designing the booklet to meet given conditions.

The first step will be the taking of a type form and analyzing it.
Either the instructor will demonstrate or, better, each pupil may be
given a booklet of type form and required to take it apart and put it
together again. Any way to give the pupil the information in a form that
will cause it “to stick.” In woodwork, it would be done by means of the
traditional shop demonstration--a wise practice, since psychology
teaches us that sight percepts are among the strongest.

Second, the pupils must acquire experience. Let them make a booklet
according to definite specifications provided them by the instructor.

The process thus far is mainly deductive or analytic. So far there has
been no invention or design, but the pupils are now prepared for it.
Using the information and experience now available, let them design a
booklet to meet certain conditions. This latter part we would call the
inductive or synthetic process.

We should have two aims in our teaching of design: (1) Appreciation, (2)
Development of the creative faculty. Since all must be able to
appreciate good line and good form when they get out into life while
only a few will ever become designers in a creative sense, it is
essential, as it is also rational, that attention should be paid first
to appreciation. Past efforts show how hopeless is the problem when we
strive to give to the pupils appreciation of and feeling for line and
form by demanding original forms in the very beginning. The beginner’s
efforts at creation are abortive and the appreciation that he derives is
nil. By our insistence on this method we have given to our pupils the
idea that design means making something out of nothing. He is not far
wrong if we demand of him original designs before we have given him
anything tangible upon which to work. We say tangible as distinguished
from academic principles or rules of design. If nothing tangible is
given the pupil he must get it outside of his school experience. This
explains the superabundance of “wienerwurst” forms, bouquets tied with
ribbons, circles, etc., etc.

It is possible to create unknown out of what is seemingly unknown. When
we stop to analyze the process, however, we find that we have made use
of information, appreciation, and feeling that are known. Sometimes we
make ourselves believe that our pupils are creating unknown out of
unknown without these requisites. Analysis will show that our continued
suggestions to him, drawn from our own fund of known are the causes, and
not the pupil’s faculty. This method of teaching is the kind we have
been used to in design. It works pretty well with small classes and
individual instruction. Try it on large classes of beginners and it is
not possible to bring results that stand for class efficiency.

And why should this particular method be insisted upon exclusively with
beginners? Why should not design, like mechanical drawing and woodwork
and other subjects be developed upon a substructure consisting of
information and appreciation secured by allowing or even insisting that
the boy handle good design until he becomes saturated with a feeling for
good line and good form? Of course, if any pupil comes to a beginning
class with this information and feeling, due allowance should and can
readily be made. It is highly probable that there would be less
inclination on the part of our pupils to insist that designers are born
not made were more use made of the deductive method. When the boys no
longer see their efforts result in crudities and are enabled to acquire
the necessary feeling and information as their work proceeds, then you
find a happy and interested class that as a whole takes design as a
matter of course and not as something intended only for the few.

Whatever the method of teaching design in the regular classroom, lack of
time demands the most direct treatment of shop design. A grammar school
boy is not inclined to listen very patiently to anything that smacks of
the academic. (1) Give the boy something definite with which to work and
(2) keep him working, or “playing,” as one has fittingly designated it,
until he has made a conscientious effort to “make it a part of himself,”
that is, until he succeeds in changing the form until it no longer
resembles the original but still possesses the pleasing appearance of
the original.

If he succeeds in doing this, he is well on the way to creative effort.
Not all boys are of equal ability in other lines of endeavor, neither
are they in this. By this method of attack, however, even the
stupidest--usually stupid only in the matter of design--is not without
compensation for his effort. He has learned somewhat of the principles
that govern good design by hearing them explained and seeing them
illustrated in a piece of good design. He will have developed some
feeling for line and form thru having played with good line and form. He
can at the very least fit the form given him to an outline made by
himself after suggestions of good line placed upon the board. To this
extent, at least, you have benefited him, whereas, by the usual method
he--and there are many like him--would have simply sat idle in
discouragement--if he were not more mischievously occupied.

If our old art schools were to be criticised because they made too much
use of the imitative method when they strove to give to their students
information and appreciation and feeling for form and line thru copying
historic ornament, it would seem, from results obtained, both tangible
and in the effect upon the pupils, that our modern schools are open to
criticism when they seek to force originality upon immature minds before
they have given these minds any information or feeling.

Of course grammar school boys are not interested in historic ornament,
at least not in America. This is the weakness of the imitative method
and helped to bring in the movement which now seems to have swung to the
opposite extreme--it lacks vitality for young pupils. Instead of giving
the boy historic fragments, give him a form that is vitally interesting
to him because he sees its immediate application in the thing that is to
be made in wood. Let him play with this form combining imitation and
modification and creation just as far as he is able.

Make the problem concrete, stating the principles you have to state in a
language the boy can understand. There will not be time to bring out
every principle that might be involved in design. There must be time to
bring out those involved in the particular problem under discussion.
Balance and symmetry, for illustration, are pretty well understood by
the boy in the simple form in which he will have occasion to use them.

Take as an illustration the bookrack, Fig. 7. To present such a problem
we would place upon the blackboard the blank forms as shown, also the
decorative form as shown.

The lesson immediately divides itself into two parts for consideration:
(1) The Construction, (2) The Decoration. Under the subject of
Construction our normal school notes would suggest the following points
to be brought up: Use, Construction, Decoration; Requirements of
Utility; Limitations of Materials and Processes; Proportions of Parts
and Details; Harmony of Parts and Details; Points of Force; Construction
as Decoration. (According to Payne.) Under Decoration: Supporting
Outline; Center of Interest; Symmetry; Repetition; Radiation; Rhythm;
Contrast; Proportion in Curves; Proportion in Spaces; Unity; Subordinate
Centers of Interest; Balance.

[Illustration: FIG. 7. TEACHING DESIGN IN THE PROBLEM OF THE BOOK-RACK.]

  CONSTRUCTION

  DECORATION

  OUTLINES

  MOTIVE GIVEN

  ADAPTATION

  APPLICATION--BY A PUPIL

Taking these in their natural order, but without making much ado about
the “framework,” the shop man who has made some study of the principles
involved can call the boys’ attention to the most important points:

(1) The construction. Since the shopwork is to be carried on by class
instruction and not individually, it will be necessary to limit the
joint or joints used to those specified for the Group in which the
project is to be worked out. Joints of previous Groups may be used also.
The book rack will be made in Group VII. Some form of the groove joint
is to be used, none other.

Here we call attention to the difference between the designer and the
shop man in their handling of the problem. The discussion of
construction gives the designer an opportunity to display the
possibilities of his subject. He enumerates all the joints that may be
used with propriety in making such a piece as the bookrack, and the
pupils are encouraged to make use of as many varieties as possible. He
is totally oblivious of the fact that, while this is good teaching in
design, it is making the applications impossible except with individual
instruction--a method of instruction that may be used in small school
systems but not in cities.

(2) The manner of placing the members and the use to which the rack is
to be put will together determine the proportions of the members.

(3) For decoration, we might depend entirely upon the good form of the
outline and the stain and grain of the wood. With this particular piece,
however, we shall make use of a decorative form which will be outlined
or incised and colored with a dye.

(4) Since the design is to be made in wood and wood splits easily along
the grain, we must be careful in making an outline not to get sharp
points. Also, in making a decorative design we must avoid thin parts
that will bring incised lines close together. Also, we must take into
account in planning the members the facts of shrinkage or swelling and
the strength of the wood. The grain on the vertical members must extend
vertically and that of the horizontal member must extend from vertical
member to vertical member. This to be illustrated by referring to some
similar construction.

(5) In striving for pleasing outlines, or decorative forms either,
strive to avoid a sameness made by using many lines or forms of the same
size. “Large, medium and small” is a key that unlocks many a puzzle as
to what causes unpleasant feelings in both outline and decoration. Long
sweeping curves with short snappy ones, rather than a series made with a
compass. Make a special point of the fact, which almost every boy
overlooks, that the simple forms of outline are invariably the more
pleasing. To the beginner design means making something unlike anything
that was ever seen on the earth below or heaven above--hence the
freakish, fussy forms that are usually offered. Try telling the class
you are going to place an excellent form on the board then draw a well
proportioned oblong and watch the expressions on their faces. Yet a well
proportioned oblong with appropriate decorative form is one of the most
pleasing of forms. There will be no need to urge them to make “unique”
forms. Their inexperience and their zeal will produce a sufficient
number. Rather urge, or insist that they postpone search for “unique”
form until they have more information.

Illustrate with blackboard sketches as you go along each of these
points. Keep the boys “playing” with outline forms until you have
assured yourself they have done their best. With them, pick out three of
the best and place these in permanent form for keeping--put them on
another sheet of paper. Next, start them on the decoration. The
development of a decorative form will come much harder than the outline.
Here again the beginner will want to exhibit “unique” forms--unique only
in that they are founded upon his ignorance. Unless the boy is not a
beginner, it will be necessary in about twenty-four out of every
twenty-five cases to insist that he start with the form you have placed
upon the board for his use. If you were dealing with a few pupils, you
might take his “original” form and step by step get him to work it into
a good form. With large classes this is not possible, nor is it
necessary. Simply insist that he place the form given him in his outline
and in so doing he will acquire enough feeling for line and form to
enable him to proceed of his own accord.

(6) Have the boy put on a supporting outline, that is, tell him to draw
a line around his outline and parallel to it. Show the class on the
blackboard how this is to be done.

(7) Put in the main mass and break it up explaining as you do so that
you are seeking to get large, medium and small forms-proportion of
parts. Call attention to the efforts made to keep the lines in harmony.

(8) Call attention to the center of interest you have created. It is
unfortunate that lack of time forbids the boy’s placing colors on these
designs. Very frequently a touch of color is used to create a center of
interest, the form for this in black and white not giving the proper
significance at all. A design which in outline seems to be fussy because
of too many parts will, by a proper selection and placing of colors, be
made most pleasing. On the other hand, a design in outline that seems
agreeable may, when in color, not be agreeable because the colors make
certain parts stand out too prominently. A study of the color plate in
_Projects in Beginning Woodwork and Mechanical Drawing_ will make this
clear.

(9) If the form proposed happens to illustrate repetition, radiation,
symmetry, or if some boy develops a form that does, take time to say a
word about them. While you will not have time to “teach design” in the
few lessons, a word here and there may serve to awaken further interest
on the part of some boy.

After all is said, we recognize that the time is short, that not much
can be done. On the other hand, what little can be done is worth doing
and doing well; its possible significance can not be overestimated.


=6. Shop Excursions.= In the grammar schools, and more especially in the
high schools, plans should be made for several excursions to near by
shops in which the pupils may get an insight into the workings of
related industries. The saw-mill, lumber yards, planing mills, furniture
factories, architectural or drafting-rooms and, in fact, anything
relating to the industrial employment of men and machinery may be
visited.

That the trip may be one of profit the instructor should see to it that
the pupils are prepared for the trip by previous talks on what is to be
seen and by after talks on the meaning of what they saw.

In every case it will be necessary, or at least advisable, to have a
time arranged with the superintendent of the factory to be visited.
Pupils should be given to understand that they are being privileged and
must act the part of gentlemen, refraining from asking needless
questions of the workmen or handling the equipment. In many factories no
talking to the men at all is desired. The questions of young pupils are
often impertinent and embarassing without their intending them so to be.
The better plan is, as has just been suggested, to have the pupils
prepared by preliminary talks then take them thru the shop with eyes and
ears only open, clinching the lessons of observation afterward.

Pupils should keep together in solid lines and, should any accident
occur, the instructor should see that any loss to the factory owner or
workmen is “made good.” Usually the class will voluntarily make
recompense. It is safer and less likely to cause embarassment if it is
understood beforehand that all members of the class who go will be
expected to help repay the instructor for any money so expended.

One might think the company well able to stand such loss. It is, but it
is not always the company’s loss. Even if it were, their courtesy ought
not to be abused. We have in mind a mold for an intricate piece of
casting representing a day’s labor for two men ruined by a student’s
accidentally brushing against it with his overcoat. As the men were on
“piece work” it meant no loss to the company, except delay in getting
out the finished article. It did mean a loss to the two men, who could
ill afford it. The instructor quietly settled for the damage or loss and
the pupils reimbursed him upon reaching school. This probably prevented
the factory from excluding succeeding classes as undesirables. In
woodworking shops there is little chance for such accidents.
Nevertheless workmen there do not wish their tools or work handled. Each
class should bear constantly in mind, while on the shop excursions, that
it is making succeeding classes welcome or unwelcome in that shop.


=7. Stock Bills.= Every piece of woodwork made by a pupil consisting of
more than one member should have in addition to the working drawing a
carefully made stock bill. The reason is two-fold: It not only prevents
the pupil’s cutting out stock wrongly thru misreading the drawing, but
it saves time for the pupil. It is a practice that he will have to
master later in life if he follows any of the mechanical trades and is
just as essential a part of his shopwork as is the drawing or woodwork.
Where the drawings are made by referring to plates, experience has shown
that many a boy will be able to make a good drawing without fully
interpreting its meaning. The making of the stock bill will show him his
weakness, also it will show the instructor. No boy can make out his
stock bill without being able to read his drawing. After the drawing has
been made and then its stock bill, the boy will have become so
conversant with the plans of the thing he is to make that few mistakes
are made in working the wood, that is, mistakes due to ignorance of the
drawing.

                      STOCK BILL (Form)

  NAME________________________   ARTICLE_____________________

  GRADE_______________________   KIND OF WOOD________________
  -----------------------------+-----------------------------
        FINISHED SIZES         |       CUTTING SIZES
  ------+---------+-----+------+------+---------+-----+------
  Pieces|Thickness|Width|Length|Pieces|Thickness|Width|Length
  ------+---------+-----+------+------+---------+-----+------
     1  |   ³⁄₈   | 3   |  5¹⁄₂|   1  |   ³⁄₈   | 1³⁄₄|  6
     1  |   ¹⁄₂   | 1¹⁄₂|  4¹⁄₂|   1  |   ¹⁄₂   | 1³⁄₄|  5
     2  |   ¹⁄₂   | 1¹⁄₂|  9   |   2  |   ¹⁄₂   | 3¹⁄₄|  9¹⁄₂
     1  |   ¹⁄₂   | 5¹⁄₂| 12   |   1  |   ¹⁄₂   | 5³⁄₄| 12¹⁄₂
  ------+---------+-----+------+------+---------+-----+------

INSTRUCTIONS

  All articles in seventh grade will be made of White Pine or Yellow
  Poplar; those in eighth grade of Chestnut.

  Stock bills are not needed for articles composed of one piece of
  material only.

  Finished sizes are the sizes to which the pieces are to be planed.
  Your drawing will tell you these sizes.

  Pieces of irregular shape are to be figured at their widest and
  longest dimensions.

  Cutting sizes are obtained from the finished sizes by adding ¹⁄₄″ to
  the width and ¹⁄₂″ to the length. Cutting sizes are the sizes to which
  you work in sawing out the stock preparatory to planing it.

  All stock will be mill-planed on two surfaces to the correct thickness
  except that for the ring toss, spool holder, game-board, and laundry
  register. Thickness of mill-planed stock will be the same whether for
  finished sizes or cutting sizes. On rough stock, or stock that has not
  been mill-planed, if the finished size is ³⁄₄″ thick the cutting size
  will be 1″ thick.

  Sometimes it is possible to save material by combining two irregular
  pieces. The finished stock sizes will indicate the number of pieces
  while the cutting size will indicate the size of the single piece from
  which they are to be cut.

  Remember that length always means “along the grain of the wood,” and
  that a piece may be wider than long. Under the word “Pieces” put the
  number of pieces that are of the same size.

In the elementary schools the form of stock bill used should be as
simple and explicit as is possible. The appended form is one that has
proven satisfactory. That it may be in convenient form for student use,
it has been included with “_Projects in Beginning Woodwork and
Mechanical Drawing_,” as also is the Form for Price List and Estimate of
Cost.


=8. Estimating Cost of Material.= The accompanying form indicates
clearly what is expected of the boys in figuring their cost of material.
Since these costs are figured before the articles are made in wood, no
account is taken of material wasted. With a carefully planned course of
projects and an instructor who knows the possibilities of requiring a
boy to reduce the size of his piece when one member has been reduced
under size there is very little use for extra stock. As a rule what
stock is so returned can be used for other smaller parts. If a boy is
unnecessarily wasteful, he should be required to figure extra stock.
This is to be done only in justice to the other boys, not as a check to
the wasteful boy. Such boys, as a rule rather glory in their
wastefulness. The best check for such a boy is to require him to use his
original stock, reducing the sizes of all affected pieces as may be
necessary.

As this is, in all probability, the first problem in which the boys deal
with approximate rather than mathematically exact results, the
instructor should not become discouraged with their first attempts. No
better opportunity exists for introducing the boys to problems such as
will confront them after they leave school. The instructor will do well
to check the boys’ results by means of his own previously figured
results after the boys are all thru their figuring. There is a
difference between figuring for an answer previously given and figuring
as they must after leaving school.

In order for the boy to figure his bills he must have a Price List. A
form for a price list such as is needed for the materials that are to be
used in “_Projects in Beginning Woodwork and Mechanical Drawing_” is
appended. The prices given are neither retail nor wholesale but about
midway between what the boy would have to pay for his stock bought in
the limited quantity he needs and the cost to the school in quantity
lots. Only the best of lumber is used. Money might be saved by buying
short lengths but none is saved by buying “cull” stock with the
expectation of cutting out the defects. The prices are for Chicago,
1911-1912, and are inserted for comparison only. On lumber, 15 to 25 per
cent has been added for waste in cutting up. Since all of the stock used
in the grades is in board form, wood finish is figured only for the two
broad surfaces. The price will be found sufficient to cover the material
used on edges. The price will also cover such waste as ordinarily comes
thru the inexperienced handling on the part of the boys--they will not
“spread out” the materials to as good advantage as will a mechanic, of
course.

  (Form, reverse side of a Stock Bill)

ESTIMATE OF COST OF MATERIAL

  ----+-----------------------------------------------+------
   2  |square feet of ³⁄₄ inch stock @ 7c             | $ .14
  ³⁄₁₀|square ft. of ³⁄₈ inch stock @ 5c              |   .02
   4  |1 inch, No. 10, flat head, bright screws @ ¹⁄₄c|   .01
   5  |square feet of finish @ 1c                     |   .05
      |                                               +------
      |                                               | $ .22
  ----+-----------------------------------------------+------

INSTRUCTIONS

  Base your lumber estimate on the Cutting Sizes. All prices of lumber
  in your Price List are per square foot, therefore your stock should be
  figured by surface measure, only width, length, and number of pieces
  being considered.

  Fractions of an inch and fractions of a cent are not considered,
  except in the price per foot, and in the number of feet as noted in
  the next paragraph. If the fraction is ¹⁄₂ or over, use the next
  higher whole number; thus, 2¹⁄₂ or 2³⁄₄ becomes 3. If the fraction is
  less than ¹⁄₂, drop it; thus, 2¹⁄₄ becomes 2.

  In figuring, find the number of square inches in all pieces that are
  the same in price per foot. Reduce this to square feet by dividing by
  144. Reduce it decimally and do not carry the result beyond tenths
  place. Dispose of any fractional figures beyond tenths as directed
  above. Always write your decimal as a fractional form in the
  bill--otherwise a decimal point might be overlooked and the result be
  greatly changed. In the form above note that .3 is written ³⁄₁₀.

  In figuring finish, both surfaces of the stock are to be covered so
  that the easiest way to find the number of square feet of finish is
  simply to double the number of square feet of lumber. Edges are not
  considered. Only Groups VI, VII, and VIII have finish applied.

PRICE LIST 1911-1912.

  LUMBER--
     Chestnut, 1st grade, clear, kiln-dried:
     S-2-S to ³⁄₈″, per square foot                      5¹⁄₂c
     S-2-S to ³⁄₄″, per square foot                      7¹⁄₂c
     S-2-S to 1″, per square foot                        9¹⁄₂c
     Yellow Poplar or White Pine, clear, kiln-dried:
     S-2-S to ³⁄₈″, per square foot                         5c
     S-2-S to ¹⁄₂″, per square foot                         6c
     S-2-S to ³⁄₄″, per square foot                         7c
     Rough, 1″, per square foot                          6¹⁄₂c
  HARDWARE--
     Screws:
     1″ No. 10, flat head, bright, each                   ¹⁄₄c
     1¹⁄₄″ No. 10, flat head, bright, each                ¹⁄₄c
     1¹⁄₂″ No. 10, flat head, bright, each                ¹⁄₄c
     2¹⁄₂″ No. 10, flat head, bright, each                ¹⁄₂c
     3″ No. 10, flat head, bright, each                   ¹⁄₂c
     ⁵⁄₈″ No. 10, round head, blued, each                 ¹⁄₄c
     1¹⁄₂″ No. 10, round head, blued, each                ¹⁄₄c
     Nails:
     6d, common wire (used with, and price included in
     Mission nail)
     1¹⁄₄″ No. 17 wire brads (used in Groups V and VI
     with ³⁄₈″ stock)
       enough nails for nailing one box                     1c
     1¹⁄₂″ No. 16 wire finishing nails (used in Groups
     VII and VIII)
       enough nails for nailing one project                 2c
     No. 1617 and 1618 Mission nails, each                  1c
  MISCELLANEOUS--
     No. 81, ³⁄₄″ brass shoulder hooks for key rack, each   1c
     No. 81, 1″ brass shoulder hooks for plate rack, each   1c
     2¹⁄₂″ black Japanned wire coat hooks, each             1c
     Wire hook for coat hanger, each                        1c
     No. 1214¹⁄₂ brass screw-eye and No. 1614 hook (calendar
     mount) per pair,                                       1c
     Fixtures for electric lights and hooks for hall mirror
     are to be purchased by the individual--prices and
     tastes vary so greatly.
     Wood Finish:
     Stain, filler, shellac, wax or filler, shellac, wax or
     stain and wax, per square foot of surface              1c


=9. Lumber and Material Bill for High School.= In the grammar schools
the lumber is figured by surface measure per square foot and the form of
bill is made as simple as is possible. A high school boy should be able
to handle a problem somewhat more in keeping with commercial practice.
In addition to the material cost he should keep account of the time
expended in making his piece of woodwork so that he may figure the labor
cost as well. The small size of the stock used does not admit of the
full commercial practice. This, however, ought to be explained to the
class at this time. The following form is for High School use:

PRICE LIST, 19---- 19----

  LUMBER--Quality, 1st, clear, and kiln-dried.
  ----------------------+-----------------------------------------------
    KIND OF WOOD        |   Per 1000 feet when surfaced on two sides
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
  Thickness in the Rough|  ⁵⁄₈″ |  ³⁄₄″ |   1″  | 1¹⁄₄″ | 1¹⁄₂″ |  2″
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
                        |       |       |       |       |       |
  Yellow Poplar         |       |       |       |       |       |
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
                        |       |       |       |       |       |
  White Pine            |       |       |       |       |       |
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
                        |       |       |       |       |       |
  ¹⁄₄ Sawed White Oak   |       |       |       |       |       |
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
                        |       |       |       |       |       |
  Mahogany              |       |       |       |       |       |
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
                        |       |       |       |       |       |
  ¹⁄₄ Sawed Red Sycamore|       |       |       |       |       |
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
                        |       |       |       |       |       |
  Black Walnut          |       |       |       |       |       |
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------
                        |       |       |       |       |       |
  Plain Sawed Red Oak   |       |       |       |       |       |
  ----------------------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------+-------

  HARDWARE--

  For prices on hardware consult Hardware Catalog provided for you.

  Figure retail price, that is, figure screws at price per dozen, not
  price per gross.

  WOODFINISH--

  Per square foot of surface covered.

  LABOR--

  Per hour.

  (Form for high school use)

  BILL OF MATERIAL

  NAME__________________________  DATE BEGUN____________________________
  CLASS_________________________  DATE FINISHED_________________________
  ARTICLE_______________________  EXTRA HOURS___________________________

  ======+==================+=============================+
  Pieces|       Size       |       Description           |
  ------+------------------+-----------------------------+
     2  |¹⁄₂ × 3¹⁄₄ × 12¹⁄₂|Walnut Slats S-2-S to ³⁄₈ in.|
     1  |1 × 8¹⁄₄ × 14¹⁄₂  |   “   Stretcher “ ⁷⁄₈ in.  }|
     6  |1 × 3¹⁄₄ × 12¹⁄₂  |   “   Rails   “  “         }|
     1  |1 × 14¹⁄₄ × 14¹⁄₂ |   “   Top   “  “           }|
     4  |1¹⁄₂×1¹⁄₂ × 24¹⁄₂ |   “   Posts   “ 1¹⁄₄ in.    |
        |                  |                             |
     8  |2 inch No. 10     |Flat Head Brt. Screws        |
     4  |1¹⁄₂ inch No. 10  |  “     “    “   “           |
        |                  |                             |
        |13 sq. feet       |Wood Finish                  |
        |                  |                             |
        |                  |                MATERIAL COST|
        |30 hrs.           |                Labor        |
        |                  |                             |


  ======+==================+=======+======+====================
  Pieces|       Size       |Price  | Feet |       Cost
  ------+------------------+-------+------+----+-----+----+----
     2  |¹⁄₂ × 3¹⁄₄ × 12¹⁄₂| .10   | ⁵⁄₁₀ |    |.05  |    |
     1  |1 × 8¹⁄₄ × 14¹⁄₂  |       |      |    |     |    |
     6  |1 × 3¹⁄₄ × 12¹⁄₂  | .10   |03⁹⁄₁₀|    |.39  |    |
     1  |1 × 14¹⁄₄ × 14¹⁄₂ |       |      |    |     |    |
     4  |1¹⁄₂×1¹⁄₂ × 24¹⁄₂ | .11   |  02  |    |.22  |    |.66
        |                  |       |      |    |     |    |
     8  |2 inch No. 10     | .00¹⁄₂|      |    |.04  |    |
     4  |1¹⁄₂ inch No. 10  | .00¹⁄₄|      |    |.01  |    |.05
        |                  |       |      |    |     |    |
        |13 sq. feet       | .01   |      |    |     |    |.13
        |                  |       |      +----+-----+----+----
        |                  |       |      |    |     |    |.84
        |30 hrs.           | .15   |      |    |     |  4 |.50
        |                  |       |      +----+-----+----+----
                                             =TOTAL COST $5.34=

INSTRUCTIONS

  Under “pieces” put the number of parts that are alike.

  Under “size” put the various dimensions of pieces. In finding the
  sizes of the various pieces of lumber, examine the working drawings
  for finished dimensions, making due additions for tenons, then add
  ¹⁄₄″ to the width and ¹⁄₂″ to the length to allow for cutting out and
  squaring up. Tho you are to make use of stock mill-planed to
  thickness, you are to specify the thicknesses from which this
  mill-planed stock is got. Allow ¹⁄₈″ for mill-planing.

  Remember that length always means along the grain.

  Fractions of an inch in width and length are not considered. Neither
  are fractions of a cent in the final results. If the fraction is ¹⁄₂
  or over, take the next higher whole number. If it is less than ¹⁄₂,
  drop it. Fractions of an inch in thicknesses that are over 1″ and
  fractions of a cent in the price per foot are to be figured as they
  are.

  Lumber is measured by the superficial foot which is 1″ × 12″ × 12″.
  Boards that are less than 1″ thick are sold by surface measure. In
  other words, boards less than 1″ thick are figured for quantity as 1″
  thick.

  Standard sawed thicknesses are 1″, 1¹⁄₄″, 1¹⁄₂″, 2″, 2¹⁄₂″, 3″, 3¹⁄₂″,
  4″. Thicknesses less than 1″ necessitate re-sawing these sizes. In
  some communities the price per square foot for re-sawed stock varies
  for each difference of ¹⁄₄″ in thickness.

  In figuring, multiply the length by the width by the thickness, by the
  number of pieces. If any piece is less than 1″ thick figure it as 1″.
  Combine all results that are the same in price per foot. Reduce to
  square feet by dividing by 144. Reduce decimally and do not carry the
  result beyond tenths place. Dispose of any fractional part beyond
  tenths as directed above. Write your result in fractional form that
  the decimal point may not be overlooked and be the cause of trouble.

  The price list gives the price of lumber per 1,000 feet. The price per
  foot is readily obtainable.

  In figuring finish for these cabinet pieces, double the number of feet
  of stock as given by the stock bill to get the number of feet of
  finish. This is only an approximate method but is sufficiently
  accurate for such pieces as are to be made in first year high school,
  as specified in “Advanced Projects in Woodwork,” Group IX.


=10. Standardizing Materials and Tools.= Standardization in the manual
training shop is just as desirable and as profitable as in commercial
shops. Not infrequently young teachers begin their work with the idea
that the greater variety of tools and materials they can introduce into
their course the richer is its content. To a certain extent this is true
but experience will soon prove that there is a limit beyond which it is
not profitable to go. In grammar schools, with classes of twenty, it is
inadvisable to have more than one plane on a bench--or even in the
general tool equipment, if the courses outlined herewith are followed.
By planning the joint work carefully beforehand, or requiring the pupils
to plan their joints according to certain standards as to size, no more
than two chisels need be placed at the disposal of each boy and none in
the general equipment. The same may be said of bits, etc. Make use of
certain screw sizes, as few as can be used to advantage, and equip in
auger bits accordingly. This practice not only is less expensive but it
enables the instructor to keep the equipment well in hand both as to
sharpening and accounting.

Except with individual oversight, in small classes, it is not advisable
to plan projects for grammar schools in which holes smaller than ³⁄₁₆″
diameter are to be bored. The expense of maintaining or replacing bits
of smaller size that get broken is unwarranted.

Of course, it is not to be inferred from the foregoing that any
necessary tool is to be omitted, or that any tool is to be made to do a
work that will cause it to be injured thereby.

There is educational value in the way of imparting information in
providing pupils with a different kind of wood for each project. This
used to be specified in some of the very best courses some years ago.
Today the tendency is not only to standardize the kinds of wood but to
standardize the thickness. The economic problems arising from the
handling of many kinds and sizes of lumber more than offset the
informational value that pertains to the practice. A study of samples of
wood that are placed within easy reach of the pupils will compensate
somewhat for the loss occasioned by standardizing the kinds of stock.
After all, the presentation of three or four type woods is about all
that can be expected, as the work is now presented.

Wood finishes can be standardized in a manner similar to that of lumber
and hardware. There is undoubtedly educational value in a boy’s making
his own stains. Under ordinary school conditions, however, it is not
possible to have him do so. Nor is it advisable for the instructor
himself to mix his own finishing materials. Even the most expert
woodfinishers find it taxing their ability to mix a fresh lot of stain
that will exactly match that of a previous lot. There is nearly always
some boy, or boys, with pieces but partly covered when the stain in any
given lot is exhausted. The best way, everything considered, is to make
use of some standard color of finish in stain and filler. When a given
quantity is exhausted it is an easy matter to order more of the same
color with the assurance that the color of the new lot will match that
of the old. It is not possible to teach everything in the short time
allowed and there are excellent reasons for omitting these.

The price list and the list of equipment given herein show to what
extent the author has standardized his material and tools.


=11. Records, Forms of Reports, Grading Work.= The following forms have
proven satisfactory.

  (Form for front cover)

  CLASS BOOK

  MANUAL TRAINING CENTER___________________

  INSTRUCTOR_____________________

  (Form for pages)

  School____________ Grade_______________ Teacher______________

  ========++==========+=====+======+==========++===================
    NAMES ||Attendance|Grade|Acct. |Deportment||
  ========++==========+=====+======+==========++===================
          ||          September               ||   October, Etc.
  --------++----------+-----+------+----------++-------------------
  1       ||          |     |      |          ||
  --------++----------+-----+------+----------++-------------------
  2       ||          |     |      |          ||
  --------++----------+-----+------+----------++-------------------
  3       ||          |     |      |          ||
  --------++----------+-----+------+----------++-------------------
          ||          |     |      |          ||
    Etc.  ||          |     |      |          ||
          ||          |     |      |          ||

The foregoing form is for use in grammar school centers. One book for
each center will suffice. On the cover, the instructor will fill in the
name of the school at which the center is located, also his own name.

There should be placed after “school” on the inner page the name of the
school from which any class of boys come. Their grade and the name of
their academic teacher is to be filled in.

In marking attendance in the class book, use a short straight line for
absence. If a boy is marked absent and later comes in, a straight
horizontal line thru the vertical line made to indicate absence will
indicate tardiness. By arranging these marks in the square in some
definite order the particular time of absence or tardiness can be told.
For example, if a class comes to manual training once a week, a mark in
the upper left hand corner may indicate absence or tardiness the first
week of that month; if in the upper right hand corner, for the second
week, etc.

In the column marked “Grade” will be recorded the teacher’s estimate of
the boy’s work. In some schools boys are required to pay for material
used. The column marked “Acct.” is to be used in keeping record of money
paid by the pupil.

The column marked for deportment is not to be filled unless a boy
insists in calling the instructor’s attention to himself because of his
misconduct. On such occasions a check is recorded after his name at the
time reproof is given.

These books will be taken up by the supervisor of manual training at the
close of the year and will be kept by him.

Boys who enter or leave at times other than the beginning or close of
the regular school period should have the fact and date indicated in
connection with their names.

Where money is collected from students, the supervisor should insist
that the instructor keep a separate purse for this purpose in addition
to keeping a record in his class book. The class book record will be of
service in checking the purse account and in aiding in settling any
dispute between instructor and boy and in giving the supervisor a check
in case any parent asks for information. It is not an unusual thing,
however, for the instructor to find his purse account in excess of his
book account. This is due to the fact that he has forgotten in the
stress of other shop duties to make a record. In such a case the purse
account, not the book account is to be turned in. Since the instructor
is not a purchasing agent there will never be occasion for his book
account to exceed his cash account.

The directions given for the grammar school class book apply equally to
this high school form, except that the week is the unit instead of the
month. If a class comes five days in the week, a mark in each of the
four corners of the square for Attendance and one in the center will
indicate that the boy was absent or tardy five times that week. Always
placing the marks in definite places for definite days will indicate
what day of the week a boy was absent or tardy.

  (Form for High School)
  (Outer cover)

  CLASS BOOK

  SCHOOL_________________________
  SHOP_________________________
  INSTRUCTOR_________________________

  (Form for pages)

  Class_________________________ Section_________________________

  =============++==========+=====+=====+==========++====================
      NAMES    ||Attendance|Grade|Acct.|Deportment||
  =============++==========+=====+=====+==========++====================
               ||           First Week            ||  Second Week, Etc.
  -------------++----------+-----+-----+----------++--------------------
  1            ||          |     |     |          ||
  -------------++----------+-----+-----+----------++--------------------
  2            ||          |     |     |          ||
  -------------++----------+-----+-----+----------++--------------------
  3            ||          |     |     |          ||
  -------------++----------+-----+-----+----------++--------------------
      Etc.     ||          |     |     |          ||
               ||          |     |     |          ||


At the end of each month there will need to be sent to the regular grade
teacher information suggested in the following form. This form, when the
teacher takes off the data contained thereon, is to be returned to the
manual training center. The information contained upon this form is to
be used by the regular teacher in making up her monthly report for the
boys whose names are recorded. Deportment and attendance will be
combined with similar marks in the regular work while the manual
training grade will be recorded in the space so indicated on the regular
monthly report.

As for the form of the monthly report for the high school, most high
schools have their marking systems so arranged that the different
instructors can transfer their markings directly from the class book to
the card. If a form is desired, the grammar school monthly report will
answer as well for the high school by changing the words “School” and
“Grade” to “Shop” and “Section.”

MONTHLY MANUAL TRAINING REPORT

  SCHOOL_____________ GRADE_____________ TEACHER_____________

  =========++=====+======+=====+==========++===================
   NAMES   ||Times| Times|Grade|Deportment||
           ||Tardy|Absent|     |          ||
  =========++=====+======+=====+==========++===================
           ||       September             ||    October, Etc.
  ---------++-----+------+-----+----------++-------------------
  1        ||     |      |     |          ||
  ---------++-----+------+-----+----------++-------------------
  2        ||     |      |     |          ||
  ---------++-----+------+-----+----------++-------------------
  3        ||     |      |     |          ||
  ---------++-----+------+-----+----------++-------------------
  4        ||     |      |     |          ||
  ---------++-----+------+-----+----------++-------------------
  5        ||     |      |     |          ||
  ---------++-----+------+-----+----------++-------------------
  6        ||     |      |     |          ||
  ---------++-----+------+-----+----------++-------------------
  7        ||     |      |     |          ||
  ---------++-----+------+-----+----------++-------------------
  8        ||     |      |     |          ||
  ---------++-----+------+-----+----------++-------------------
    Etc.   ||     |      |     |          ||
           ||     |      |     |          ||

To the Teacher--Deportment is satisfactory unless checked. A boy with
two or more checks needs a word of caution and advice.

Excuses for absence or tardiness are to be given the regular teacher
except where a boy is absent from manual training but is in attendance
at the regular school the same day. In such a case the excuse is to be
given the shop instructor.

In addition to this the teacher will appoint a monitor who will
telephone to her the class attendance at the beginning of each manual
training period. Unwarranted absentees are to be attended to by her.

This record is to be returned at the very earliest opportunity to the
manual training shop. Otherwise, it may be the cause of delay in your
getting your class report from manual training the following month.

In grading work the tendency today is not to try to make fine
distinctions such as 83 per cent, etc. “Excellent” for work that is
equal to that of a mechanic, “Good” for work that is above average,
“Passed” for average work and “Poor” for work that is not acceptable
will be sufficiently exact. If the system of marking is by numbers, mark
by tens, as 90, 80, 70, and 60, seventy being “Passed.”


=12. Shop Conduct.= In conduct, a boy at the manual training center
should be governed by the same rules that obtain in the regular school,
with slight exception.

It is sometimes argued that shopwork provides an opportunity for free
and natural or unrestricted action on the part of the pupils. This they
argue is a distinct advantage of manual training over the restraint of
the academic classroom and results in greater development educationally.
Theoretically this seems reasonable. Practically, it soon becomes
evident that young pupils, such as our manual training boys, are lacking
sadly in judgment in the power to discriminate between liberty and
license in shop conduct. Allow them the privilege of talking to one
another about necessary matters without asking permission of the
instructor and you must be a strong teacher to prevent abuse of the
privilege. To allow unrestricted conversation, however, is decidedly
bad. Even with grown men and women working in shops, only restricted
conversation is allowed. The reason is evident. If with men and women of
supposed judgment there must be insistence on order and system, how much
more so with immature boys.

Have definite signals and insist upon their being heeded promptly. The
three bells used in the regular school work serve well to open the
school. One, the opening of the doors; two, the call to order; three,
the tardy bell.

Some instructors do not allow the pupils to enter the shop--do not open
the shop--until the second bell rings. Other instructors allow the boys
to enter the shop at the first bell and begin work as soon as they like.
The first method is used mainly in large cities where large classes have
to be cared for and where the boys are morally inacute. The second is
preferable in some ways. It allows the pupil to make the most of his
time. It has the disadvantage in that it requires the instructor’s
immediate supervision after the first bell, or else allows the pupil to
commit errors because of no supervision. As a rule it is the boy who
most needs the extra time who does not make use of the privilege.

Of course, where pupils are not admitted to the shop before the second
bell, provision must be made for taking care of them inside the building
in inclement weather.

To fully appreciate the merits of either practice it should be explained
that each boy is to be held responsible for the tools at his bench and
the class as a whole for all other tools. Each boy is expected to look
over his tools upon coming into the shop that he may report any tool
that is missing or damaged. Should he fail to make a report until late
in the period, or not at all he should be made to feel the
responsibility. Broken or lost tools should be paid for as the case
merits.

At the close of the period, all tools are to be in their places ready
for the instructor’s inspection. It should be explained to the pupils
that this inspection is not to relieve them of responsibility but merely
to assist them in avoiding an oversight.

Unnecessary damage to the bench is to be reported and the responsibility
fixed as is that concerning tools.

At the ring of the tardy bell every boy should be in his place with his
material, ready for work. Since the recitation generally follows the
tardy bell, that should be the signal for quietness and attention such
as is demanded in the regular schoolroom. The instructor will have
marked his attendance by the time the pupils have got in order and the
recitation may begin at once.

Insist upon continued attention during the recitation and demonstration.
The author has made it a point to call upon any boy showing signs of
inattention to recite. No boy likes to be considered a dullard and
usually he will confess to inattention after which the proper note can
be made of it.

Where the full half-day is given to shopwork, a five minute rest period
is advisable. This allows the boys to relax and to make known to one
another their ideas. Where possible, they should be allowed to move
about and converse freely. Under no circumstances, however, should there
be allowed scuffling or loud talk, either at rest or before the tardy
bell. Aside from the damage that might be done themselves and the
equipment, there should be instilled a feeling of respect for the shop
environment.

The instructor should aim to have on each bench as many of the tools as
will be in great demand. The general tools will be kept in a wall case.
Permission should be given to boys to go after any such tool whenever he
needs it without asking for it. Likewise it is advisable to allow boys
standing permission to go to the drinking fountain, if it be in the same
room, or to the wash basin or the finishing tables. It should be
understood that there is to be no congregating at these places.
Permission to leave the room should be required.

At the close of the period a tap of the bell will be the signal for the
boys to put away their tools and work, get their wraps, brush off the
shavings from the bench top and from under the bench into the aisle.
When all are ready and the tools have been inspected, the teacher’s
signal to rise, and then to pass may be given. Have the rows instructed
to pass out in a definite order.

A few schools require the boys of the last class of the day to clean up
the entire shop. In many communities this is not advisable for there is
some justice in their complaints that they are not janitors. There will
be no objection by boys in any community, however, to brushing out from
under and around their own benches. This practice makes the janitor’s
work comparatively light and does not offend the boy’s sense of justice
or fitness. They do not object to the cleaning of the room so much as to
the idea of doing what another is paid for doing.

The discussion of ways and means of maintaining discipline is not
appropriate in a book of such brevity as this. Sufficient to say that a
manual training teacher to do his best work should be a teacher well
trained in methods of teaching and the psychological bases back of them.
He should at least understand the art if not the science of good
teaching.

Where an instructor is engaged in teaching his entire time it is not
just that he should be required to attend to formal disciplining of
pupils. In most schools, therefore, an instructor, like the regular
grade teacher, conducts his shop as best he knows how. When a boy
insists in being unruly in spite of all the instructor can do, then that
boy should be sent to the principal of the building in which he belongs
for further treatment. The shop instructor will be expected to make use
of the many little devices for maintaining order that are required of
other teachers. Otherwise he will find himself wanting to send boys to
the principals more frequently than he should. His maintenance of order
will be a much easier task than is that of the regular teacher.

While these restrictions may occasionally work a hardship, they
effectually prevent such injustices as the boy who is inattentive during
the demonstration bothering the boy who was attentive, when it comes to
doing the work. Our American boy is not in much danger of being injured
by our school requirements of order and discipline. In fact, he would be
benefited by a little more strictness than is now the custom, both at
school and at home.

The high school shop bells will of necessity be those for other classes
with the exception of the double period. There will be no necessity for
a rest period, of course.


=13. The Lesson.= An examination of the Lesson Outlines of Part II will
make clear the component parts of the lesson. These parts are:
Recitation, Preparation for Demonstration, Demonstration, Work.

In making an analysis of the lesson, let us begin with “Preparation for
Demonstration.” The recitation really belongs to the preceding lesson,
and will be discussed last. The preparation for demonstration consists
in having a pupil read aloud sections of a text which bear directly upon
the demonstration which is to follow. The purpose of this is primarily
to assist in preparing the minds of the pupils for the demonstration. Of
course this preparation could be made orally by the instructor. In
centers where the classes repeat the work day after day for the full
week, the instructor finds himself enthusiastic in giving the beginning
classes their lessons but, in spite of good intentions, slighting the
lessons of the classes that come the latter part of the week. The
reading from the text insures every class equal attention. Of course,
the instructor will enliven the text by the addition of information from
his own experience. There are other uses for the text, such as a
reference book in case the worker finds as he works that he has
forgotten some point. Also it enables the instructor to formulate
definite questions on the work with some assurance that the student can
answer them the week following. The preparation must not be too
elaborate. This is a common fault of beginners in teaching. It is a
means, not an end.

Some instructors object to reading before the demonstration on the
ground that it detracts from the demonstration. When one thinks only of
the exercise of observation this seems reasonable. It must be
remembered, however, that young pupils are not skilled in making
observations as are grown people. It is wise therefore to give them some
aid in making their observations by giving them preliminary hints. In
fact, those instructors who object to the preliminary reading frequently
do precisely the same thing, that is prepare the boys for the
demonstration, when they talk during the demonstration--they usually
explain each step just before taking it. With the preliminary reading of
the text very little talking need interrupt the demonstration, which may
proceed rather rapidly.

Here one sees the necessity for a well organized course. Each lesson
must have its subject matter connected with previous knowledge of the
class.

A successful demonstration demands an equipment such that each boy may
see what is being done by the instructor. The closest of attention
should be demanded. The matter to be demonstrated should be unfolded
step by step. It is not necessary that all the steps be given. Any steps
that have been given in a previous demonstration may be presupposed.
Little time should be lost between the demonstration and its
application.

The remainder of the lesson, the recitation, is to be given at the
beginning of the next period or session. If shopwork has been lacking in
one thing more than another it has been in the failure of the instructor
to “clinch” his instruction. “The best test that a person has understood
a thing is, that he can reproduce it in his own way in his own words.”

The woodshop instructor has a right and, in justice to the boys and his
work, should insist that they stand squarely upon both feet and express
the information asked for in good, plain, correct English. A boy who
says he “knows but cannot tell it” only half knows. Unless he learns the
lesson well enough to express it well, that lesson will soon fade so
that when the instructor attempts to build upon that knowledge later, as
he must, there will be trouble for both teacher and boy.

In written tests insist upon a definite form and neat papers. For
example, on one line have the date and name, one to the left side of the
paper and the other to the right. In the middle of the paper on the line
just below this, have the name of the subject. Insist upon marginal
spaces at either side of the paper. Do not have the questions copied
upon the boys’ papers, but insist that their answers shall be in the
form of complete statements, a subject and predicate--so complete that
the instructor need not refer to the question to mark the answers.

At all times use good English, never rough language if you expect the
boys to respect you and the surroundings. Quietly correct their
grammatical errors. These things cost little in effort and assist in
overcoming the slovenly tendencies so characteristic of boys at this
age.

In the Lesson Outlines will be found questioning hints under Recitation.
Some fifteen or twenty years ago our text books in geography, grammar,
history, etc., had suggestive questions after each lesson. These
questions were very helpful but like many another good thing they were
abused. Weak teachers found it easier to conduct a recitation by putting
these questions to the students in routine order, instead of using them
merely as hints to enable them to present to the pupils all the matter
of the lesson. To conduct a recitation by asking routine questions like
conducting a recitation with a text open before the teacher when pupils
are required to recite without the text, is not the sign of the highest
type of teaching and is bound to result in more or less formalism and
lack of vital interest.

Of recent years, texts have gone to the other extreme and not a few
educators are wishing texts would give some hint as to the points of
importance in the lesson. This the present book aims to do in the hints
by questions under Recitation. These questions are purposely put in an
incomplete form so that the instructor must needs formulate them before
putting them to the pupil. They are intended, as are any public
speaker’s notes, merely to enable him to carry on the discussion or
recitation in a systematic and logical manner, missing none of the
important facts to be brought out.

The whole time taken in any one lesson for recitation, preparation for
demonstration and demonstration should not exceed, ordinarily,
twenty-five or thirty minutes.

It is a skilled teacher who can present a lesson to the best advantage.
The best possible presentation is a subject that manual training men can
investigate with profit. Asking questions and getting answers and giving
demonstrations may mean much or may mean little in the way of developing
the boys--nor can you tell always by the material results obtained--it
all depends upon how these things are done.


=14. Maintenance.= By maintenance we refer to the cost of keeping a
center running after it has once been fully equipped, exclusive of
teachers’ salaries. This will be found to have several variable factors
entering. A careless instructor can very quickly run the cost of
maintenance to a point almost prohibitive. The loss of tools by theft,
waste of lumber in getting out stock, etc., the careless planning of the
work so that articles are made, requiring much lumber and little work,
quickly makes inroads upon the appropriation for manual training
purposes.

An allowance of ten per cent. for depreciation in equipment should be
sufficient under all ordinary conditions. An allowance of one dollar per
pupil per year should be ample where all material used is provided free.
In fact, observation covering a period of several years shows that boys
coming one-half day a week for the school year of ten months and making
models similar to those in “_Projects in Beginning Woodwork and
Mechanical Drawing_” cost the Board approximately seventy-six cents per
pupil for maintenance. This center had very close supervision, however,
and waste and breakage was reduced to a minimum.

The most prolific source of monetary outlay is caused by planning
projects--it makes no difference whether they are small or large, a boy
uses just as much lumber in a given amount of time,--that require little
effort in their construction. For illustration, a boy may make a taboret
with four solid sides and with butt joints where he should be making a
taboret with grooved joints. The former construction has its place, but
should not monopolize the whole scheme as it is so often allowed to do.
A course properly planned will show that the cost of eighth grade work,
such as taborets, etc., is no greater than that of the seventh grade
which is composed of much smaller but more numerous projects.

Again, it is a mistake to plan many small projects consisting of small
parts in the hope of effecting economy. The awkwardness of the average
grammar school boy will make it necessary to discard much of such stock.
Where the parts are of some size, it is possible in most every instance
to give him a new but smaller set of dimensions and require him to
continue to work on the piece originally given.

A scrap box for holding small pieces that remain after cutting out stock
from the board, closely supervised so that the boys shall look over the
pieces it contains before cutting a full board, is another source of
economy. There should be comparatively little “kindling” for the
janitor, if due care is taken by the instructor. Above all things, it
should be understood and enforced that no boy is to discard a piece once
he has worked upon it without the instructor’s permission. This he
seldom needs to give for he can usually show the boy how to make further
use of the piece in question by reducing its size.

While most schools provide the materials free, some do not, but require
the pupils to pay the actual cost of the material used should they care
to take the article home. There is something to be said in favor of each
practice. The latter is not unjust as it provides the necessary
training. It tends to make class distinction, however, in communities
where pupils are not able to purchase their pieces. On the other hand,
it discourages the taking of things that are not really wanted and
permits a most economical administration--provided the supervisor uses
judgment in the selection of his projects. It tends to make him
resourceful in providing projects of interest, which is an advantage
provided the projects selected are in harmony with the general plans of
the course, which is supposed to provide for the orderly introduction of
processes.

High school pupils, according to the course outlined herein, will have
about the same amount of time in the half-year allotted to benchwork in
wood as do the grammar school boys in the full school year. The cost of
maintenance will therefore be approximately the same for the half year
as is that of the grades for the year.

In purchasing supplies it is possible, where the courses are organized
and the materials standardized as indicated herein, to save by ordering
in quantity lots. The lumber can be purchased by the 1,000 feet of the
various thicknesses wanted. Likewise the hardware can be got in quantity
lots, with the assurance that next year’s work will call for any stock
that may not be used the present year.

Short lengths in lumber are just as good as long for manual training
purposes and are cheaper.

Whatever is to be purchased by open quotations should be definitely
specified so that one and only one quality can be delivered.

The printed catalogs of the various dealers with their retail prices are
helpful, tho these prices are always “shaded” when quantity quotations
are asked.


CHAPTER V.

EQUIPMENT.


=15. Equipment.= In the following discussion, effort is made to suggest
type forms of equipment rather than to offer a complete treatise. The
equipment offered may be added to or reduced as the exigencies warrant.
While it is complete enough to do the work planned in the outline of the
course in woodworking as given herein, and lists everything necessary to
do the work in a most approved manner, it does not go to the extreme of
listing every tool that might be used in a cabinet shop. It lists every
tool that must be used for the work outlined.

While it lists an equipment for grammar school and another for high
school, the grammar school equipment with slight additions can be made
to serve the purpose of high school work just as well in communities
where the same equipment must serve for both.

THE GRADE SHOP. The best arrangement of benches and other equipment, so
far as completeness and convenience is concerned is that shown in Fig.
8. This is a floor plan of a grade school center. Montclair, N. J. An
extended teaching experience does not indicate any way in which this
arrangement could be improved.

We quote from a description of this shop which appeared in the April,
1911, MANUAL TRAINING MAGAZINE.

  The shop shown in the accompanying illustration is one of six in the
  town of Montclair, N. J., and what is said of equipment holds true of
  the others. It is unique in that it is housed in a structure
  especially built for the purpose. This shop measures 29 by 54 feet,
  and, having windows on all sides, allows the arrangement of equipment
  with but little reference to space or light. The equipment consists of
  twenty-four single benches with the usual tools, and a few essentials
  for simple metalwork. The benches are partially equipped with
  rapid-acting vises, the old wooden ones being replaced as they wear
  out.

  The demonstration theater was designed for a class of twenty, but
  larger classes have made twenty-five seats necessary. The
  demonstration bench has both woodworking and machinist’s vises. It is
  used also by students for such metalwork as comes in connection with
  the shop projects. This bench is provided with drawers for tools and
  compartments for sheet metals, etc.

  The lumber rack was made by bolting five pieces of 4 × 4-inch chestnut
  to the side wall, and inserting six 21-inch lengths of 1³⁄₄-inch gas
  pipe in each upright. Such a rack is convenient, serviceable and
  inexpensive.

[Illustration: FIG. 8

BELLEVUE AVE. SHOP--MONTCLAIR, NEW JERSEY]

  T TEACHER’S ROOM
  D DEMONSTRATION THEATRE
  L LUMBER RACK
  S SINK
  F FINISHING BENCH
  G GLUE BENCH
  1 CASE FOR UNFINISHED WORK
  2 EXHIBITION CASE
  3 TEACHER’S DESK
  4 SUPPLY CASES
  5 OPEN SHELVES
  6 GENERAL TOOL CASE
  7 DEMONSTRATION BENCH
  8 GRINDSTONE

  The glue and finishing tables, not shown in the pictures, have zinc
  tops, and are provided with drawers and compartments for keeping the
  materials used. They provide the means for doing with cleanliness and
  order what sometimes is a rather troublesome part of shopwork.

[Illustration: FIG. 9. INTERIOR OF GRAMMAR SCHOOL SHOP, MONTCLAIR, NEW
JERSEY.]

[Illustration: FIG. 10. LOCKERS FOR STORAGE OF UNFINISHED WORK, GRAMMAR
SCHOOL SHOP, MONTCLAIR, NEW JERSEY.]

  The permanent exhibit case measures 20 inches by 5 feet 6 inches by 12
  feet. It has adjustable shelves, glass doors, and is provided with the
  same style of lock as are the general tool case, supply cases and
  demonstration bench.

  The cabinets for pupils’ unfinished work have been planned to meet the
  problem of providing a satisfactory place in which a pupil can keep
  his work from lesson to lesson. The first requirement of the shop
  seemed a standard size locker; secondly, it must be adjustable to
  provide for various sizes of projects; and lastly, local conditions
  demanded a system which could be moved without difficulty. The idea
  has developed into what is the most satisfactory system with which the
  writer (Albert F. Siepert) has had experience, either as student or
  teacher. A sectional case was designed which meets equally the needs
  of all classes in the art and handwork department, whether they be
  bookbinding, woodwork or sewing. Each section measures 20 in. by 24
  in. by 36 in. The open case in the illustration shows the maximum
  number of compartments, eight pupils to the section, each pupil having
  a space 8¹⁄₄ in. by 10⁵⁄₈ in. by 18¹⁄₂ in. for his work. By removing
  four or six of the upright partitions, the space may be given to four
  or even to two pupils. Thus any piece of work up to 11 in. by 18¹⁄₂
  in. by 34 in. can be kept out of the way and under lock and key.
  Alternate sections are assigned to a class to avoid congestion and
  confusion.

  The cost of the building several years ago was $3,500. Local
  carpenters built the demonstration theater, lumber rack, cabinets,
  etc. The demonstration bench cost $27; the stain and glue tables
  approximately $4.50 per running foot; and the cabinets for unfinished
  work $12 per section.


=16. Size of Classes.= It should be noted that the building was planned
originally for twenty benches and that it now contains twenty-four.
Twenty benches ought to be the maximum number so far as the giving of
proper instruction is concerned. When more are given the instructor the
conditions for the most efficient work are not good. This problem of
accommodating twenty-four boys will have to be met, and may as well be
planned for just so long as school directors insist upon crowding fifty
pupils in the regular classroom when the teacher ought to have but
thirty-five or forty to do her best work. Then, too, it frequently
happens that a room contains more boys than girls. Some of these boys
might be sent to another and adjoining center. It is best to plan to
care for twenty-four boys, however, where the regular room enrolment
runs above average. In this case the dimensions of the building as given
in the preceding text should be changed. Enlarge the width of the
building by six feet. This will permit the placing of the extra
demonstration seats upon the platform and also allow sufficient floor
space near the lumber rack for cutting out stock, and about the
finishing table, etc.

In placing benches, plan to have the light enter over the back and the
left end of the bench. That is, when standing at his bench, the light
should strike the pupil in the front and left.

An amphitheater is very desirable both in the high school and the grade
school shop. In large classes it is a necessity. With small classes it
is possible to make use of desk stools arranged about a bench. Many
manual training centers, in fact, most manual training centers, do not
have the amphitheater. This is no argument against its desirability. It
simply means that the boys get but an imperfect understanding of the
demonstration and that their work must suffer accordingly.


=17. Lockers.= The locker problem is one that has been a source of
trouble. The arrangement described in connection with the description of
the Montclair shop is by far the best solution of this problem that has
come to the author’s attention. The extreme length of pieces that can be
accommodated is 34″. A few pieces will be longer than this. These can be
accommodated outside the locker or the locker sections may be planned
large, say 40″ in the clear.

The grindstone is best suited for pupils’ use in sharpening edge tools.
Where a small motor is used for power, it is very desirable to have a
small dry emery grinder for the use of the instructor. Ten dollars will
cover its cost and it will pay for itself quickly. It can be placed near
the grindstone.

Unless the centers have frequent delivery of lumber supplies, or if
there is no central cutting-up station, it may be found advisable to add
to the building described a small room for the storage of quantity
lumber with, possibly, a power saw in it.


=18. Bench and Tool Equipment for Grade Center.= The individual bench is
to be preferred to the two- and four-pupil bench. Aside from the fact
that the double benches are not conducive to good order and system, it
is next to impossible to get such benches to remain rigid without going
to an initial expense that would be sufficient to purchase the
individual bench. Unless they are rigid, it is an injustice to ask a boy
to return accurate work. The effect that violent work at one side of a
double bench will have upon fine or accurate laying out by some boy on
the other side of that bench is not difficult to imagine. The only
argument in favor of a double bench is economy of space. If space must
be economized, it is better to place the individual benches back to back
with just enough space between them to keep them from touching and thus
shaking each other.

The rapid-acting vise is desirable, if it is a good one. Some
rapid-acting vises now on the market are not as desirable as the old
fashioned continuous metal screw vise. A vise is in almost constant use
and should be most carefully investigated before being specified.

INDIVIDUAL EQUIPMENT.

  Bench, open frame without drawer, glued up top 23 in. by 52
  in. tool rack, rapid-acting vise, approximate cost             $ 10.00
  Jack-plane, Stanley or Bailey No. 5, each                         2.09
  Wooden mallet, Stanley No. 1                                       .13
  Rule, Stanley No. 34                                               .17
  Hammer, Maydole bell-faced claw, 13 oz.                            .50
  Wing Dividers, P. S. W., 6″                                        .23
  Chisels, socket firmer, Buck Bros., ³⁄₈″ and ³⁄₄″ both             .83
  Marking-gage, Stanley No. 62                                       .12
  Try-square, Stanley No. 20, 6″                                     .21
  Saw, Bishop Handy Saw, 12″, No. 9                                  .75
  Swedish Sloyd Knife No. 7                                          .40
  Bench Brush, No. 2A, Orr & Lockett                                 .30
  Bench-Hook                                                         .25
  Chisel-Board                                                       .00
                                                                   -----
    Total                                                         $ 5.89

GENERAL TOOLS FOR 24 PUPILS.

  6 Nailsets, cup pointed, assorted sizes, @ 10c.                  $ .60
  6 Try-squares, Stanley No. 20, 12″, @ 36c.                        2.16
  3 Turning-Saws and Frames, 18″, @ $1.00                           3.00
  6 Spokeshaves, Bradshaw and Field or Stanley No. 84, 2¹⁄₂″,
  nut adjusted @ 59c.                                               3.54
  3 Gouges, 1″, No. 8, outside bevel, Buck Bros., @ 43c.            1.29
  2 Ratchet Braces, Barber No. 33, 8″ sweep, @ $1.45                2.90
  2 Plain Braces, Barber No. 13, 8″ sweep, @ $1.08                  2.16
  3 Crosscut-saws, Bishop No. 89, 22″, 10 pt., @ $1.55              4.65
  3 Rip-saws, Bishop No. 89, 24″, 8 pt., @ $1.65                    4.95
  2 Planes, Jointer 22″, Bailey No. 7 or Stanley, @ $3.03           6.06
  2 Rose head Countersinks, Buck Bros., @ 23c.                       .46
  2 Screwdriver bits, Buck Bros., @ 17c.                             .34
  4 Screwdrivers, 4″ blade, fluted handle, @ 25c.                   1.00
  2 Auger-bits, 1¹⁄₄″, R. J., @ 80c.                                1.60
  4 Auger-bits, 1″, R. J., @ 60c.                                   2.40
  2 Auger-bits, ³⁄₄″, R. J., @ 50c.                                 1.00
  4 Auger-bits, ¹⁄₂″, R. J., @ 35c.                                 1.40
  4 Dowel-bits, ³⁄₈″, R. J., @ 27c.                                 1.08
  4 Dowel-bits, ¹⁄₄″, R. J., @ 27c.                                 1.08
  4 Dowel-bits, ³⁄₁₆″, Morse, @ 12c.                                 .48
  1 T-bevel, Stanley No. 18, 8″, @ 44c.                              .44
  1 Monkey Wrench, Coes, 8″, @ 50c.                                  .50
  1 Pair Combination Pliers, 6″, @ 40c.                              .40
  2 Combination India Oilstones, 6″ × 2″ × 1″, in iron boxes,
  @ $1.00                                                           2.20
  1 Oil-can, ¹⁄₄ pt., @ 18c.                                         .18
  6 Handscrews, No. 812, @ 40c.                                     2.40
  2 Steel Bar Carpenter Clamps, 2¹⁄₂ ft., @ $1.69                   3.38
  1 Set Steel Figures, ³⁄₁₆″, @ $1.88                               1.88
  1 Shellac Can, 1-qt.                                               .78
  1 Kerosene Glue Heater, 2-pts.                                    1.50
  1 Steel Framing-Square                                            1.00
  200 Individual plane-irons, @ 25c.                               50.00
  6 Coping-saws with Blades, @ 25c.                                 1.50
  2 Brad-awls, @ 15c.                                                .30
  2 Scribe-awls, @ 15c.                                              .30
                                                                 -------
         List price                                              $108.83

SUMMARY.

  24 Benches, @ $10.00          $240.00
   1 Demonstration Bench          27.00
  25 Sets of Tools, @ $5.89      147.25
     General Tools               108.83
                                -------
         List price             $523.08
                                -------
         Less 10%               $470.68

This estimate does not include lockers, shelving, machinery, etc. The
cost of lockers, shelving, etc., can be roughly estimated by noting the
price per foot as given in the description of the Montclair shop. A
grindstone with motor power can be purchased for $30.00 for stone and
$60.00 for motor.

Where the instructor must do much grinding, a No. 101 Cortland Corundum
Wheel Co. Grinder, cost with tool rest and two grinding wheels complete
ready to belt $10.00, will be found an extremely satisfactory
investment.

Where power is not obtainable a Pyko Peerless Dry Emery Grinder, cost
$6.00 with tool rest attachment, will give excellent service. It cuts
much more rapidly than a grindstone and is therefore not so tiring on
the one who turns it.

In justice to other makers of tools it must be explained that the
mentioning of the firm names is due to the fact that indefinite
specifications are worthless. There are other tools as good as those
named, some of which are preferred by some manual training men to those
mentioned. Those mentioned are first class in every respect and will
serve to give the dealer an idea of the class of goods you want. It will
be for the purchaser to see that he gets equal quality. By all means,
avoid the poor grade tool whatever its price. Were it not for limited
space the author would like to list other makers of first class tools.
If one is not conversant with the different brands let him consult some
of his mechanic friends.

The prices given are list price for 1911-12, Chicago. A discount of at
least 10 per cent. will be allowed for quantity purchase.


=19. Individual Tools.= The individual plane-iron is not absolutely
necessary. It is very desirable since the plane is in constant use. To
make use of the same irons class after class is unjust to the good
worker. He will spend a good part of the period getting his iron in
condition only to find when he comes again the next week that it all has
to be done over again. It puts a premium on slovenliness. True, the same
argument holds for the chisels, and it would be well if individual
chisels could be provided. The chisel is not used nearly so much as the
plane-iron and can, therefore, be used in common much better than the
plane-iron.

No machinery for cutting up stock, is included in the estimate. In most
cities the high school machinery can be used for this purpose. According
to the course outlined, there will be little stock cutting by machinery
required. What little there is might well be done as “busy work” by the
more rapid workers thruout the year. Such stock could be stored away
until needed.


=20. Equipment for Mechanical Drawing, Grade Center.= Since the teacher
of woodworking must also be the teacher of mechanical drawing in the
grade center, no special room for drawing is advisable. With the first
twelve weeks devoted to drawing, the woodworking benches can be used as
drawing tables, the woodworking tools not being placed until all the
drawing work is completed. When the shop is properly cleaned during the
summer vacation there is no reason for its not being kept as clean as
any special drawing room during the drawing period of twelve weeks. The
benches should be scraped clean and shellaced.

A blackboard is needed for both drawing and woodwork and may as well be
placed in the woodworking shop.

For the most efficient presentation of drawing there will need to be
plenty of blueprints or plates from which the student may work. These
must be so well executed, as to technique, that the pupil will have
before him only the best as models. No one would think of placing before
the writing class other than the best models of style and execution in
penmanship, yet it is not infrequent to find mechanical drawing students
copying from blueprints that are far below standard as to excellence.

In presenting the problems, models will be found of very great help to
the student in his efforts to interpret the conditions. Too much
dependence should not be placed upon models in the work of older pupils.

INDIVIDUAL EQUIPMENT.

  Drawing-boards, 16″ × 22″, basswood, each        $ .70
  T-squares, 22″, plain blade, fixed head, each      .20
  45° Triangle, 8″ each                              .16
  30°-60° Triangle, 10″, each                        .15
  Desk Stool, 24″, rubber tipped, each              1.25
                                                  ------
  Total                                           $ 2.46
                                                  ------
  Total for 25 sets, less 10%                     $55.45

There will be needed in addition to the above a knife, scale, compass,
and sandpaper block. The knife and rule used in the woodwork will serve
equally well in the drawing. The sandpaper blocks or pencil sharpening
blocks can be made in the shop.

In connection with these blocks, it will be found expedient to have them
so fastened to the bench that pupils cannot get them on top of the bench
in sandpapering a point on the pencil. This can be done by fastening the
block to the bench with a screw in such a way that it can be revolved
from under the top of the bench when wanted. Otherwise beginners will
have the bench top and then drawings covered with the fine lead of the
pencil.

In getting equipment avoid “baby” sets. A taboret drawing, to be well
made, must be on a scale of ¹⁄₄″. This, with marginal lines will mean a
paper of 12″ by 18″.

PERSONAL EQUIPMENT.

  Excelsior or Eagle Pencil Compass.
  Pencil, Dixon Manual Training, 2H.
  Eraser, Ruby Pencil.
  Envelope for holding drawings.
  Thumbtacks, two.

The personal equipment to be uniform should be purchased by the school
and sold to the pupils.

While this personal equipment may be kept in the woodworking lockers,
some instructors prefer to have a special case of drawers to hold the
drawing envelopes, and blocks of wood with suitable holes for holding
the pencils, erasers, and tacks, monitors being appointed to look after
them.

The paper used need not be as expensive as that of the high school where
problems are to be inked. A manilla paper such as is used in the regular
or freehand drawing classes will answer admirably and can then be
provided by the school. Such paper is usually purchased in sizes 12″ by
18″ and 9″ by 12″. The former is the desired size for the eighth grade
work and the latter for the seventh grade. A 6″ by 9″ size will be found
suitable for stock bills, where printed blanks are not to be provided.

In the matter of paper, it is possible to practice economy without
detracting from the drawing. All that are not wanted at the close of the
year should be kept and the reverse sides made use of where experimental
penciling is required.

Drawing equipment will be stored when woodwork is begun.


=21. High School Joinery Shop.= The general plan of the wood shop for
the high school will depend so greatly upon its relation to other shops
in which wood is worked that the most that can be hoped by discussing it
is that the plan offered may offer a starting point from which to work.
In some communities the one shop will be all that is needed both for
cabinet work, first year joinery, and pattern-making with, possibly,
wood-turning. In other communities the number of students taking the
work may warrant separate shops with full machine equipment for each. In
still others it may be advisable to have adjoining shops but still
necessary to make use of the same machinery. Some schools plan to have
all the classes in one big room, sometimes having as many as seventy
boys with three instructors. If this latter plan is followed, tho it is
not advised, there should certainly be provided an adjoining
demonstration room where the instructors may talk to the boys without
the competing noises of other classes.

Fig. 11 is a suggestive sketch. It provides for lockers similar in
make-up to those discussed in connection with the grammar school.

[Illustration: FIG. 11. SUGGESTED FLOOR PLAN FOR HIGH SCHOOL SHOP.]

   1. GLUE TABLE
   2. GRINDSTONE
   3. BAND SAW
   4. JIG SAW
   5. LOCKERS FOR UNFINISHED WORK
   6. WALL RACKS
   7. FINISHING TABLES
   8. TEACHER’S DESK
   9. TOOL AND SUPPLY CASES
  10. EXHIBIT CASE
  11. LUMBER RACKS
  12. CUT-OFF SAW AND TABLE
  13. CIRCULAR SAW
  14. PLANER
  15. JOINTER
  16. INDIVIDUAL LOCKERS
  17. GRINDER

General tools are to be kept in a tool room which may be placed in
charge of a student assistant. Each boy is then to be provided with
metal checks. When a tool is asked for the assistant will hang the
student’s check in the place of the tool taken out. Upon the return of
the tool the check will be returned.

First year students may be safely taught to use the band-saw and
jig-saw, with proper safe guards about the former. Other machines are
best kept in a separate room.

Since high school pupils ought to be taught how to apply more difficult
finishes, such as rubbed varnish, than those taught in the grammar
schools, a special room will be necessary in order to avoid the shop
dust. This room should be made fire proof, if possible, and should have
racks about the walls upon which to place work being finished.


=22. High School Bench and Tool Equipment.= The benches for the use of
high school pupils are best when of the cabinet type having drawers
below in which each student may keep his individual edged tools. Such a
bench with drawers enough to accommodate all the boys that will be able
to make use of the bench during the day, with a hinged or revolving
board upon which may be fastened the general tools that belong to that
bench will cost approximately thirty dollars. This includes a first
class rapid-acting vise. The individual bench in the high school is as
desirable as it is in the grades.

Where a high standard of technique is to be demanded of the pupils, the
following tools should be added to those specified for the grammar
school bench equipment:

INDIVIDUAL TOOLS.

  Smooth-Plane, 1³⁄₄″ cutter, 8″ long, Stanley     $1.66
  Jointer-Plane, 2³⁄₈″ cutter, 22″ long, Stanley    3.03
  Screwdriver, 6″, Stanley                           .35
  T-Bevel, 6″, Stanley                               .40
  Combination India Oilstone, 1″ × 2″ × 6″          1.10
  Oil-Can                                            .18
  Crosscut-saw, 20″, 10 pt., Bishop No. 89          1.40
  Rip-saw, 22″, 8 pt., Bishop No. 89                1.55
  Spokeshave, 2¹⁄₂″ blade, Bradshaw and Field        .57

  In place of the Bishop Handy Saw specified in the grammar school list,
  substitute Bishop No. 8 Backsaw, 10″, cost 94c.

  Provide for each drawer, that is, provide each boy with the following:

  Chisel, 1″, bevel edged, firmer socket, Buck Bros.    $ .57
  Chisel, ¹⁄₄″, bevel edged, firmer socket, Buck Bros.    .41
  Chisel, ³⁄₈″, socket mortise, Buck Bros.                .40
  Plane-iron for Jointer                                  .29
  Plane-iron for Jack-plane                               .25
  Plane-iron for Smooth-plane                             .23
  Spokeshave-iron                                         .15
  Sloyd knife, 2⁵⁄₈″                                      .40

This list presupposes that the mortising of the first year will be done
by chisel alone, no boring. If mortises are to be bored first, it will
be advisable to equip each bench with a Barber’s 8″ ball bearing brace,
cost $1.45.

In addition to the general tools specified for the grammar school, make
the following changes and additions:

GENERAL TOOLS.

  Omit the rip- and crosscut-saws.
  Omit the plain braces in case the bench is so equipped.
  Omit handscrews and clamps, and glue heater.
  Add 1 doz. Handscrews, No. 812, cost each 40c.
  Add 2 doz. Carpenters’ Clamps, wood bar, 2-ft., @ 85c.
  Add 1 doz. Carpenters’ Clamps, wood bar, 4-ft., @ 95c.
  Add 1 Set Steel Letters, ³⁄₁₆″, @ $1.88.
  Add 1 Steam Glue Heater, O. & L. No. 9, @ $9.50.
  Add 2 Draw-Knives, 8″, L. & I. J. White, @ 65c.
  Add ¹⁄₂ doz. Steel Cabinet Scrapers, @ 10c.
  Add 1 Set Auger-Bits in box, R. J. @ $4.00.

MACHINERY.

For the highest type of work the following machines should be placed at
the disposal of the first year high school classes:

  Grindstone.
  Scroll or Jig-saw.
  Band-Saw.

These machines should have proper safety devices and should be placed
where they will be under the immediate observation of the instructor.
Machines for woodworking vary so greatly in price and desirability that
it is not thought wise to specify any particular make. Only the
experienced man will be called upon to equip with machinery and such an
one will have the information necessary to make the purchase.

For the second year, or optional cabinet work, there should be placed at
the disposal of the students, and they should be taught their use, the
following machines in addition to those specified for the first year
work:

  Circular-Saw.
  Machine Jointer.
  Planer.
  Boring Machine and Mortiser.
  Trimmer.

It is possible so to arrange these machines that the circular-saw and
planer may be used in getting out stock for other classes. The floor
plan given contemplates such use.


EQUIPMENT FOR HIGH SCHOOL MECHANICAL DRAWING.

A special room should be provided for the teaching of high school
mechanical drawing.

A north light is best and the tables should be so placed that the light
may come upon the board from in front and the left. If artificial light
must be used, employ the inverted system.

[Illustration: FIG. 12. TABLE FOR MECHANICAL DRAWING.]

Tables have much to commend them over the pedestal. They are easily
swept around and keep a room looking orderly. Fig. 12 shows a type of
table that is commendable. On the left are drawers for keeping the
students’ instruments. On the right is a drawer for keeping general
equipment that is used by the boys in common. Below this drawer is the
cabinet for holding the drawing-boards. These boards are so locked that
only the board belonging to the boy with the key can be released. Such a
table with a top 24″ by 48″ and 41″ high will cost $30, list price.
Estimate for individual equipment will be as follows:

TABLE EQUIPMENT.

  1 Table                                        $30.00
  1 Stool                                          3.50
  5 Boards, of size to fit cabinet, @ $1.50        7.50
  5 Sets Instruments, German Silver, @ $5.00      25.00
  1 Scale, @ 38c                                    .38
  1 T-square, 24″, celluloid lined                 1.50
  1 45° Triangle, 8″, celluloid                     .48
  1 30°-60° Triangle, 10″, celluloid                .48
  1 French Curve,                                   .20
  1 Bottle Ink                                      .25
                                                 ------
        Total                                    $69.29

PERSONAL EQUIPMENT.

  Sheets Paper.
  Heavy Manilla Envelope for holding drawings.
  Thumbtacks.
  Eraser.
  Pencil, hard, 4H.
  Pencil, soft, H.

GENERAL EQUIPMENT.

  1 Roll Blueprint Paper, (not to be purchased until ready to be used).
  1 Blueprinting Frame, 18″ by 24″.
  1 Roll Tracing Cloth.
  Blackboard Triangles, Straight-edge, Compass.

There will also need to be cases in which to file the envelopes in which
the students keep their completed drawings. If much blueprinting is to
be done, there should be a suitable room with sink and running water.
Where models are used, there should be a case for storing them when not
in use.

Practice varies greatly as to the amount of material provided by the
school. Some schools require the pupils to furnish their own
instruments, as well as paper and other supplies. The advisability of
requiring much or little will have to be determined by the social
conditions of the community it is intended to serve.




PART II.

LESSON OUTLINES.


CHAPTER VI.

LESSON OUTLINES FOR GRADE VII.


GRADE VII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 1.=


INTRODUCTORY TALK--

  The purpose of manual training.

  Explanation of signal bells--beginning, five minute rest, closing.

  Regulations concerning drinking fount, lavatory, toilet.

  Responsibility for tools; care of bench top.

  Shop deportment. To and from shop.

  Ownership of finished work.


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 2--

  _Essentials of Woodworking_, Appendix III, Sections 1 and 4.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in making Introductory Drawing.

  Instruments, lines, angles, lettering.

  Sharpening pencil--sandpaper.


WORK--

  All pupils begin Introductory Drawing.

  NOTE:--Copies of drawings from which pupils are to work should be in
  the hands of the pupils while demonstration is being given.


GRADE VII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 2.=


RECITATION--

  Working vs. perspective drawings?

  Drawing instruments (T-square, etc.) How held?

  Kind of lines (vertical, oblique, etc.) How drawn?

  Angle defined. How measured? Does extending the sides change the
  value?

  The angles of the triangles? How avoid inaccuracies at the vertex in
  drawing?

  How many degrees in a circle? In the sum of the angles about a point?

  How would you draw an angle of 75 degrees?

  The order of procedure in putting on border and cutting lines?

  Why have a cutting line?

  Letters and figures, how proportioned? (Test pupils at black board.)

  After the proportions are once learned, how lay out for lettering?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 3--

  _Essentials_, Appendix III, Sections 2 (relating to scale), 3, and 6.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in making Drawing for Woodwork Group I.
  (Cutting-board.)

  Order of procedure; scale; blocking out; placing and spacing views;
  simple dimensioning.


WORK--

  Complete Introductory Drawing.

  Make drawing for Woodwork Group I.

  Rapid workers measure, draw, and dimension three views from a
  rectangular block. (Blocks used in the study of woods.)


GRADE VII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 3.=


RECITATION--

  Scale? Figures on the drawing vs. size of the drawing.

  Projection and relation of views--The four principles developed.

  Order of procedure--Determining the size and spacing; blocking out
  vertically; horizontally; dimensioning; lettering; inking; if not to
  be inked?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 4--

  _Essentials_, Appendix III, Section 2. (That part relating to lines,
  etc.)


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in making Drawing for Woodwork Group II.

  (Counting-board, key-rack, hat-rack.)

  Foreshortening.


WORK--

  Complete drawing for Woodwork Group I.

  Make drawing for Woodwork Group II. Counting-board.

  Rapid workers make another drawing in Group II.


GRADE VII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 4.=


RECITATION--

  The conventions--Seven kinds of lines--how made and their meanings?

  What part of a mechanical drawing is made freehand?

  A broken view? Why used?

  Section drawing? Cross-hatching?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 5--

  _Essentials_, Appendix III, Section 5.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in making Geometric Sheet.

  Circles.


WORK--

  Make the geometric drawing first.

  Complete unfinished drawings for Woodwork Group II.

  Rapid workers make other drawings for this latter group.


GRADE VII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 5.=


RECITATION--

  The hexagon? How made?

  The six point star?

  The octagon?

  The ellipse?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 6--

  Review _Essentials_, Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 in Appendix III.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in making drawings for Woodwork Group III. (Ring
  toss, game-board, laundry-register, spool-holder.)

  Hidden edges.


WORK--

  Complete drawings for Woodwork Group II.

  Make drawings for Woodwork Group III.

  Rapid workers make other drawings in Group III.


GRADE VII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 6.=


RECITATION--

  Perspective vs. working drawing?

  Instruments, their uses?

  Scale drawing?

  Seven kinds of lines? Their meanings?

  The freehand part of a mechanical drawing?

  Broken view?

  Cross-section? Cross-hatching?

  Four principles of projection?

  Spacings of letters and figures?

  Hexagon? Octagon? Six point star? Ellipse?

  Order of procedure in making mechanical drawing?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 7--

  _Essentials_, Introduction, and Section 25.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in making drawings for Woodwork Group IV.
  (Sleeve-board, bread-board, cake-board, scouring-board, coat-hanger.)

  Center and section lines, cross-sections, tangents, points of
  tangency, dimensioning circles.


WORK--

  Complete drawings for Woodwork Group III.

  Make drawings for Woodwork Group IV.

  Rapid workers make other drawings in Group IV.


GRADE VII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 7.=


RECITATION--

  Sharp, clean tools, why?

  Care of bench top?

  Care of tools not in immediate use?

  Some of the more important results in manual training?

  Take a rectangular block and name the terms used, length, etc.

  Grain? “Against the grain?”

  Face side, face edge? Other names? How and where marked? Why?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 8--

  _Essentials_, Sections 52, 53.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in grinding plane-iron.

  The essential points in making drawings for Woodwork Group V.
  (Polish-box, knife-box, bird-box, nail-box, broom-holder, bench-hook.)


WORK--

  Complete drawings for Woodwork Group IV.

  Make drawings for Woodwork Group V.


GRADE VII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 8.=


RECITATION--

  Grinding tools? Why?

  How is chisel held? Angle depends upon what? How much?

  Why move tool across the stone?

  The effect of frequent change of angle?

  Why turn the stone toward the tool?

  Why use water on the stone?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 9--

  _Essentials_, Sections 54, 55.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in whetting plane-iron or chisel.


WORK--

  Complete drawings for Woodwork Group V.

  Make other drawings for Woodwork Group V.


GRADE VII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 9.=


RECITATION--

  Two kinds of oilstones? Advantages of manufactured stones?

  Advantages and disadvantages of coarse and fine stones?

  Why use oil on stones?

  How avoid wearing a stone uneven? How level an uneven stone?

  Explain fully how to sharpen a chisel?

  How tell when tool is at the correct angle?

  The movement, and caution?

  Explain fully cause and removal of wire edge?

  How get a still keener edge?

  Whetting a gouge? Use of slipstone?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 10--

  _Essentials_, Sections 56, 57.


DEMONSTRATION--

  Testing chisel or plane-iron for sharpness.

  The essential points in making out stock bills.


WORK--

  Complete unfinished drawings for Woodwork Group V.

  Make out stock bills for drawings made of Woodwork Group V.

  Rapid workers make out bills for other groups.


GRADE VII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 10.=


RECITATION--

  How is a plane-iron sharpened? Why round the corners? How shape the
  iron for general use?

  Explain fully how to tell whether a tool is sharp or not?

  Caution in making the test?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 11--

  _Essentials_, Sections 20, 21, 22, 23.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in figuring stock bills.


WORK--

  Complete making out of stock bills for Woodwork Group V.

  Figure stock bills for Group V.

  Rapid workers figure other bills.


GRADE VII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 11.=


RECITATION--

  Jack-plane; its length, shape of cutting edge, use? How remove the
  hollows? Shape of blade for manual training use?

  Smooth-plane; length, use, shape of blade? Setting of the cap iron for
  fine work?

  Jointer; its use? Advantage over short plane for this purpose?

  Fore-plane; use, shape of iron?

  Block-plane; its length, use? How do its adjustments differ from those
  of the ordinary plane?

  Is the block-plane always necessary for planing ends? When not?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 12-- _Essentials_,
Sections 1, 2.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in using try-square and marking faces.

  The essential points in modifying outline and designing decoration for
  some one of the following: Letter-holder, thermometer-back,
  calendar-back, bill-file, handkerchief-box, glove-box or any other
  simple piece involving no new processes.


WORK--

  Instructor assign one of the above projects and pupils modify the
  outline and decorate. Each pupil make at least three sketches
  carefully and submit to instructor.

  Rapid workers will finish any past work that is unfinished.


GRADE VII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 12.=


RECITATION--

  The unit of measure in woodwork?

  Rules and their markings?

  How placed on the material? Consecutive measurements?

  Finding the middle of a piece without computation?

  Dividing a piece into any number of equal parts?

  Try-square? Name the parts. Rough usage?

  Three uses? Illustrate.

  Sliding or scraping with try-square?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 13--

  _Essentials_, Sections 18, 19.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in putting plane parts together, adjusting.


WORK--

  Finish any unfinished work of last lesson.

  Make full size pattern of designed part of last lesson and fill in
  decorative design.

  Finish any unfinished stock bills.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP I.)


=Lesson 13.=


RECITATION--

  Planes? Four kinds? Material of which made?

  Name and point to the 16 parts of the iron plane.

  Plane-iron and cap-iron fastened together how?

  Purpose of cap-iron?

  Fastening the irons in the throat of the plane?

  Adjustment of irons?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 14--

  _Essentials_, Sections 26, 28, 31.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in squaring up mill-planed stock.

  No definite dimensions but to be square and as large as stock given
  will make.

  Face marks; edge planing; end planing; tests.


WORK--

  Set and adjust planes.

  Square up Cutting-Board stock, Woodwork Group I.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP II.)


=Lesson 14.=


RECITATION--

  Planing?

  Selection of faces? Planing against grain? Kind of shavings? When
  planes are not in use?

  Position at bench?

  Starting stroke? Finishing? Feathering shaving? Backward stroke?

  Edge planing?

  Preliminary sighting with eye?

  Plane to be used? Effect of not keeping full length on edge?

  How to remove a high arris?

  Tests for an edge?

  End planing?

  Explain fully.

  Tests?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 15--

  _Essentials_, Sections 5, 14, 29, 32.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in squaring up mill-planed stock to definite
  dimensions. Gaging, measuring length, etc.


WORK--

  Finish cutting-board.

  Begin Group II. Counting-board.

  NOTE:--Chamfering comes after laying out and boring and will be
  demonstrated later.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP II.)


=Lesson 15.=


RECITATION--

  Marking-gage? Four parts named? Its use?

  The spur? How sharpened? How far project?

  Setting the gage? Illustrate.

  Position of hand in gaging wide and narrow boards? Kind of lines?

  Back-saw? Name the parts.

  Explain the position of the hands and the motions in sawing.

  Location of the kerf with reference to the line?

  Finishing second edge? Tests?

  Finishing second end. where definite length is to be obtained?
  (Measuring, lining, etc.)


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 16--

  _Essentials_, Sections 36, 38, 43, 44, 45.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in laying out counting-board and finishing it.
  Dividing the piece into four equal parts, gaging, measuring, lining.
  The size of bits, inserting bits, sighting, thru boring. Numbering the
  holes. Chamfering.

  Shaping the pegs.


WORK--

  Continue the counting-board, laying out, boring, chamfering,
  numbering, making pegs.

  Rapid workers begin hat-rack or key-rack.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP II.)


=Lesson 16.=


RECITATION--

  Brace or bitstock? Name the parts.

  Ratchet brace? Special uses?

  Inserting a bit?

  Auger-bit? Six parts and their uses?

  Bit sets? Sizes and number?

  How tell the size of a bit?

  How tell when a bit is boring properly?

  Thru boring?

  How lay out a chamfer?

  How work a chamfer?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 17--

  _Essentials_, Sections 37, 39, 42.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in laying out and working hat-rack and key-rack.
  Locating and attaching hooks, etc.


WORK--

  Finish unfinished work and then begin either coat and hat-rack or
  key-rack.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP III.)


=Lesson 17.=


RECITATION--

  Center-bit?

  Drill-bit? Used for what? Caution? Why and how make a seat?

  Gimlet-bit? Its use?

  Brad-awl? Used for what and how?

  The advantages of patent spiral screwdrivers and automatic drills?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 18--

  _Essentials_, Sections 27, 30, 34. Memorize 34.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in squaring up rough stock.

  Surface leveling, winding-sticks, their use, gaging to thickness, etc.


WORK--

  Complete unfinished counting-boards.

  Begin either ring-toss or game-board.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP III.)


=Lesson 18.=


RECITATION--

  Planing first broad surface level or true? What is a true surface?
  Which side is to be selected?

  Three preliminary tests with eye and try-square?

  Caution when a definite thickness is to be obtained?

  The manner of testing a surface for trueness with straight-edge only?

  The manner of testing a surface for trueness with winding-sticks and
  straightedge? Of what advantage are the sticks?

  Explain fully how you would proceed to level a surface which has two
  corners diagonally opposite high with reference to the center and the
  other two low with reference to the center.

  Finishing the second side? What indicates the proper stopping place in
  planing the second side? What is the test? Why no other tests as in
  first surface?

  State the six steps taken in squaring up rough stock.

  What ones of these are modified in planing mill-planed stock? Why?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 19--

  _Essentials_, Sections 11, 12, 13.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in ripping and crosscut-sawing at the bench,
  explaining the reasons for the two kinds of saws.


WORK--

  Continue the work of Group III.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP III.)


=Lesson 19.=


RECITATION--

  Name two kinds of saws and five parts to each.

  Meaning of the number on the blade at the heel?

  Set? Why, and how? Amount for dry and wet lumber?

  Rake or pitch? What is meant and upon what does the amount depend?

  Sawing? Holding saw, index finger? Angle of cutting edge? Starting
  stroke? Position of thumb of left hand? Kind of strokes and pressure?

  Guiding the saw? How? Caution? Sawing in vise, how get angle?

  How and why oil sides of saw?

  Crosscut-saw? Cutting edges of teeth where and why? Pitch?

  Rip-saw? Shape of teeth? Why?

  How tell a rip-saw from a crosscut-saw?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 20--

  _Essentials_, Sections 40, 45, 64.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in laying out ring-toss and marble-board, boring
  to depth, countersinking, making or cutting dowel to length and
  shaping top end, sandpapering with block, use eraser for pencil work.
  Put waste sandpaper in the box for future use in wood-finishing, grade
  8. Never sand without permission. Glueing and fitting dowel.


WORK--

  Continue ring-toss and game-board.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP III.)


=Lesson 20.=


RECITATION--

  Countersink-bit? Its use?

  Boring to depth? Fully. Where many holes of the same depth are to be
  bored?

  Sandpapering? When and when not?

  Purpose of sandpaper block? How place the paper on it?

  When are arrises sanded and why?

  Curved surface sanding?

  Numbers on the back of a sheet of sandpaper?

  Sanding joints? Why not?

  What is to be done with worn sandpaper?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 21--

  _Essentials_, Sections 3, 9, 10.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in cutting out stock.


WORK--

  Continue Group III.

  Beginning at this point, pupils are to cut out their own stock from
  boards S-2-S.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP IV.)


=Lesson 21.=


RECITATION--

  Framing-square? Two parts named? Its uses? What tables on blade and
  tongue?

  Name five parts to the dividers.

  Three uses for dividers?

  Explain fully how you would set dividers? To a radius of 2″.

  How are the points sharpened and why lean the top forward in marking?

  Where are pencil lines better than knife lines? Why? How are they best
  removed?

  Laying out rough stock if the edge of the board is fairly straight?

  If not straight, how?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 22--

  _Essentials_, Sections 6, 15, 59, 60.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in laying out and working sleeve-board and
  bread-board. Stock is S-2-S. Caution about smoothing broad surfaces
  only, not leveling, thickness being more important here than true
  plane surface.


WORK--

  Complete any unfinished work, then begin Group IV.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP IV.)


=Lesson 22.=


RECITATION--

  Pencil-gage? How made? When and where used?

  Illustrate another way of pencil-gaging.

  Turning-saw? Its use? Name three parts.

  Why two handles? Caution about setting them?

  Illustrate manner of holding the saw. Caution about holding the blade
  with reference to the surface of the wood.

  How cut enclosed curves with this saw?

  Why not saw accurately to the line? How remove the waste?

  Spokeshave? Five parts?

  For what and how used? Kind of shavings?

  How adjusted?

  Explain how to lay out for a curved edge? How to work it?

  Sandpapering curved edges?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 23--

  _Essentials_, Sections 16, 17, 24. (Informational).


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in laying out and working the scouring board and
  coat-hanger.


WORK--

  Continue Group IV.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP IV.)


=Lesson 23.=


RECITATION--

  Compass-saw? Especial use? Caution?

  Saw-filing? Four steps? Reasons for each? The parts of the saw-set?

  The old wooden planes? Why have they been displaced?

  How are they adjusted? How are the wedges withdrawn in jack-plane and
  smooth-plane?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 24. (Informational)--

  _Essential_, Sections, 4, 7, 8.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Continue Group IV.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP V.)


=Lesson 24.=


RECITATION--

  Bevel? Name the three parts.

  To what angles can it be set?

  How set to 45 degrees? Three ways.

  How set to 30 and 60 degrees?

  Slitting-gage? Mortise-gage?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 25--

  _Essentials_, Sections 62, 65, 66.


DEMONSTRATION--

  Explain the manner of working duplicate parts. Gaging like widths,
  Marking off like lengths, Testing different parts in relation to one
  another.


WORK--

  Begin Group V after completing Group IV.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP V.)


=Lesson 25.=


RECITATION--

  How proceed where there are two or more like parts?

  The aim in handling the different tools in duplicate work?

  Illustrate.

  Hammers? Two kinds? Advantages and disadvantages? Three parts?

  How hold the hammer? Illustrate.

  Nails? How made originally? Forged and cut?

  How are wire nails made?

  Two classes, three kinds of nails? Differences?

  History and meaning of 10-penny, etc.?

  How else are nails sold?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 26--

  _Essentials_, Sections 67, 68, 69.


DEMONSTRATION--

  Nailing position, and withdrawing nails; setting nails.


WORK--

  Group V.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP V.)


=Lesson 26.=


RECITATION--

  What caution is necessary in starting cut nails?

  Explain position in nailing and give reasons?

  Why not set nails with the hammer in cabinet work? How use the
  nailset? Illustrate the position.

  Withdrawing nails?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 27--

  _Essentials_, Sections 41, 70, 71, 72.


DEMONSTRATION--

  Explain boring for screws, countersinking, use of screwdriver-bit.


WORK--

  Group V.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP V.)


=Lesson 27.=


RECITATION--

  Screwdriver-bit? Its advantage over screwdriver? How is it kept from
  jumping out of groove in screw head?

  What about the old style screwdriver?

  Screws? How made and sold?

  Size is designated how?

  The difference between gage for wire for screws and nails?

  Two kinds of screws? Blued screws are how colored?

  How are the parts prepared for fastening in hard wood? In soft wood?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 28--

  _Essentials_, Review Chapter I.


DEMONSTRATION--

  Order of procedure in assembling the various boxes. Placing the bottom
  and truing the frame.


WORK--

  Group V.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP V.)


=Lesson 28.=


RECITATION--

  Instructor will place six questions on the blackboard, selected from
  Chapter I _Essentials of Woodworking_. Pupils answer five in writing.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 29--

  _Essentials_, Review Chapter II.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Group V.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP V.)


=Lesson 29.=


RECITATION--

  Instructor will place six questions on the board, selected from
  Chapter II, _Essentials of Woodworking_. Pupils will answer five in
  writing.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 30--

  _Essentials_, Review Chapter III.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Group V.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VI.)


=Lesson 30.=


RECITATION--

  Instructor will place six questions on the board, selected from
  Chapter III, _Essentials of Woodworking_. Pupils will answer five in
  writing.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 31--

  _Essentials_, Section 152.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in laying out and working woodwork for the design
  problem of Group VI.


WORK--

  Complete Group V, then begin VI.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VI.)


=Lesson 31.=


RECITATION--

  Name three kinds of stain.

  Advantages and disadvantages of water stain?

  Advantages and disadvantages of oil stain?

  Advantages and disadvantages of spirit stain?

  How apply water stain? How thin it?

  How apply oil stain? How thin it?

  How apply spirit stain? How thin it?

  Fumed oak?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 32--

  _Essentials_, Section 153.


DEMONSTRATION--

  1. Applying design. 2. Outlining. 3. Applying color. 4. Waxing.


WORK--

  Continue Group VI.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VI.)


=Lesson 32.=


RECITATION--

  Is waxing an old or a new finish? How made formerly?

  Advantages and disadvantages of a wax finish?

  Caution about applying a rapid hardening wax?

  Five steps in producing a wax finish?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 33--

  _Essentials_, Review Chapter IV. (Those parts that have been
  previously studied.)


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Group VI.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VI.)


=Lesson 33.=


RECITATION--

  Instructor will give oral test from Chapter IV, _Essentials of
  Woodworking_.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 34--

  _Essentials_, Review Chapter V. (Parts that have been previously
  studied.)


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Group VI.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VI.)


=Lesson 34.=


RECITATION--

  Instructor will give oral test from Chapter V, _Essentials of
  Woodworking_.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 35--

  _Essentials_, Review Chapters VI, VII. (Parts that have been
  previously studied.)


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Group VI.


GRADE VII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VI.)


=Lesson 35.=


REVIEW--

  Instructor will give oral test from Chapters VI, VII (parts only that
  have been previously studied in regular work), _Essentials of
  Woodworking_.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 36--

  This closes the text work for the year.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Those finishing projects will assist slower pupils or do necessary
  work about the shop. All pupils are to be kept busy at some work until
  the last day they come. The last day each class will polish tools.

  Lessons 36 and 37. For finishing up woodwork. Boys helping one
  another. Cleaning bench tops.

  Lesson 38. For cleaning tools. Each class assigned certain tools to
  clean. Final class applies vaseline.


CHAPTER VII.

LESSON OUTLINES FOR GRADE VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 1.=


INTRODUCTORY TALK--

  The plan of the year’s work.

  (Mechanical Drawing 12 weeks--Group 1, Straight Lines; 2, Circles; 3,
  Tangents; 4, Planes of Projections; 5, Review; 6, First choice Dado
  Group of Woodwork--Working Drawing; 7, First choice Cross-lap Group of
  Woodwork--Working Drawing; 8, Second choice Cross-lap or Dado Group of
  Woodwork--Working Drawing; 9, Completion of any unfinished drawings
  and Making stock bills; 10, Figuring stock bills; 11, Structural
  Design; 12, Decorative Design. (Woodwork the rest of the year--Two
  Groups, exercises and applications using drawings just made.) (Along
  with this, information concerning lumbering, etc.)


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 2--

  _Essentials of Woodworking_, Appendix III, Sections 3, 4, and 6.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in making Drawings I. (Group I, _Problems in
  Mechanical Drawing_.)

  (Copies of the different problems of Group I--One each--should be in
  the hands of the pupils that they may refer to them as the
  demonstration is being given.)

  Border and cutting lines, spacing the views, blocking-out, dimensions,
  letters, final lines. Projection and relation of views. Visible and
  invisible edges.


WORK--

  Each pupil solve his problem, freehand carefully on scratch paper
  first, putting on dimensions. Then carefully to full scale with border
  and cutting lines but no lettering or dimensions, only sheet number
  and pupil’s name.

  Rapid workers exchange problems and solve as time allows.


GRADE VIII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 2.=


RECITATION--

  The names and relative positions of the three views most used in
  mechanical drawing?

  Send a pupil to the blackboard to make three views of a rectangular
  block having chamfered edges on one side.

  Develop the four principles of projection and relation of views.

  Letters and figures, how proportioned? Test pupils at the blackboard.

  How does a freehand working drawing differ from a mechanical drawing?

  Give fully the order of procedure in making a mechanical drawing.

  How do you go about determining the placing and spacing of your
  drawing?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 3--

  _Essentials_, Appendix III, Sections 2 and 5.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in making Drawing II. (Group II, _Problems in
  Mechanical Drawing_.)

  Center-lines; circles; cross-sections and cross-hatching; dimensioning
  circles.


WORK--

  Solution of problems in Group II.

  Complete any unfinished problems in I.

  Rapids workers exchange problems in Group II and solve as time allows.


GRADE VIII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 3.=


RECITATION--

  The conventions--Scale drawings, why? Figures on the drawing vs. the
  size of the object?

  Seven kinds of lines--their meanings and how made?

  When figures cannot be placed between the arrows, what?

  What part of a mechanical drawing is to be made freehand?

  A broken view? Why used?

  Section drawing? Cross-hatching?

  Hexagon, octagon, ellipse; how made?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 4--

  Essentials, Review Sections 34 and 36.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in making Drawing III. (Group III, _Problems in
  Mechanical Drawing_.)

  Tangents--Locating centers of arcs and points of tangency.


WORK--

  Solution of problems in Group III.

  Complete any unfinished problems in previous groups.

  Rapid workers exchange problems in Group III.


GRADE VIII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 4.=


RECITATION--

  The steps in squaring rough stock to dimensions?

  The steps when the stock is mill-planed on two surfaces?

  A true surface? Selection of first surface? When several parts are to
  be fitted?

  Preliminary tests before beginning to plane?

  Planing--Many or few shavings? Roughened grain? Planes used?

  Protecting the cutting edge?

  Position of the body? Long or short strokes? Starting and stopping the
  stroke? Feathering the shaving?

  Testing broad surfaces with a straightedge?

  Testing narrow surfaces with winding-sticks?

  Explain precisely how to proceed in removing wind.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 5--

  _Essentials_, Review Sections 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in making Drawing IV. (Group IV, _Problems in
  Mechanical Drawing_.)

  Planes of projection. Number and prove the solutions.


WORK--

  Solution of problems in Group IV.

  Complete any unfinished problems in previous groups.

  Rapid workers exchange problems in Group IV.


GRADE VIII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 5.=


RECITATION--

  Face side, face edge? Why? How marked?

  Planing first edge? Choice? Two preliminary tests?

  How place plane to remove high arris? Planes used? Tests?

  Finishing second edge? What determines amount to be removed?

  Tests?

  Finishing second side? Gaging? Testing?

  Planing first end? Tests? Caution about length?

  Finishing second end? What limits amount to be planed? Tests?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 6--

  _Essentials_, Sections 46, 47.


DEMONSTRATION--

  Numbering and lettering the points in the two views of the test
  problems preparatory to their solution.


WORK--

  Complete unfinished “Problems.”

  Solve test Problems.

  Rapid workers may begin drawings for Woodwork Group VII.


GRADE VIII.

(Mechanical Drawing)


=Lesson 6.=


RECITATION--

  Two classes of chisels? Their uses?

  Four parts to each class?

  Three parts to a mallet? The rule in selecting a pounding tool?

  The size of a chisel indicated how?

  Caution about holding chisel?

  Explain fully the cutting action of a chisel. How it wedges, how this
  is overcome?

  Explain fully horizontal paring.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 7--

  _Essentials_, Sections 48, 49, 50, 51.

  The essential points in making the working drawings for Woodwork Group
  VII.


WORK--

  Make a drawing from Woodwork Group VII.

  Rapid workers make drawing of second choice Woodwork Group VII.


GRADE VIII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 7.=


RECITATION--

  Vertical paring? How? Position of hands? Amount to be cut at each
  stroke? Position of worker relative to the line to be cut?

  Oblique and curved line paring? Direction of the cut with reference to
  the grain?

  Paring chamfers? Paring along the grain? Across the grain?

  Firmer gouge? Bevel inside or outside? How is its size determined?

  Position of the hands in roughing out? In finishing stroke? How
  produce shearing cut?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 8--

  _Essentials_, Review Sections 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in making working drawings for Woodwork Group
  VIII.


WORK--

  Complete unfinished drawings of Group VII.

  Make a drawing from Woodwork Group VIII.

  Rapid workers make another selection from Group VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 8.=


RECITATION--

  Why grind tools?

  How much angle? How determined?

  Why move the tool across the stone?

  The effect of frequent change of angle?

  In which directions should the stone turn with reference to the tool?
  Why?

  Why use water on a stone?

  Two kinds of oilstone?

  Advantages of coarse and of fine?

  Advantages of manufactured stones?

  Why use oil on stones?

  How avoid wearing stone uneven? How level an uneven stone?

  Explain fully steps in whetting plane-iron or chisel.

  Holding tool? Angle in whetting as compared to angle in grinding? How
  get tool at correct angle? The movement? Wire edge? How removed? If a
  still keener edge is desired?

  How is a gouge whetted?

  Explain fully how to tell when a tool is sharp.


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 9--

  _Essentials_, Read Sections 62, 63.


DEMONSTRATION--

  Sharpening scraper.


WORK--

  Complete any unfinished drawings.

  Make other selections in either Groups VII or VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 9.=


RECITATION--

  Order of procedure in laying out duplicate parts?

  Advantages of this method over that of laying out each part singly?
  Illustrate?

  Why use a scraper? Common mistake of beginners about mill-planed
  stock?

  Position of the hands in scraping?

  The steps in sharpening a scraper?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 10--

  _Essentials_, Sections 76, 77.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in making stock bills.


WORK--

  Finish any unfinished drawings and make out stock bills for working
  drawings made.


GRADE VIII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 10.=


RECITATION--

  Joinery? What is meant by the term?

  Illustrate how direction of grain affects the planning of the relation
  of the parts.

  Why join faces together rather than other surfaces?

  What about consecutive measurements? Gaging, lining, etc.?

  What is meant by superposition?

  In fitting parts together how tell where the different parts belong?

  What is visualizing? How may one make it easier to visualize?

  Knife vs. pencil in laying out?

  Sawing joints in hard wood? In soft wood?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 11--

  _Essentials_, Review Sections 14, 64.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in figuring costs from stock bills made in last
  lesson.


WORK--

  Finish any unfinished stock bills and figure costs.


GRADE VIII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 11.=


RECITATION--

  Back-saw? Purpose? Crosscut-saw or rip-saw? Set?

  Explain fully how to hold, start, cut, stop cutting across the grain.

  Explain fully when cutting along the grain. (Cutting tenons.)

  Accurate sawing to a line? Explain?

  How saw when paring is to be done?

  Sandpapering, when? Why?

  Sandpaper block? Its purpose? Size as compared to paper?

  Sanding arrises? When? How?

  Sanding curved surfaces?

  Sanding parts that go to make up joints? Why not?

  Numbers on the back of sandpaper sheet?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 12--

  _Essentials_, Sections 58, 61.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in structural and decorative design of some
  project involving groove or cross-lap joint or both, elected by the
  class, (book-rack, etc.) or assigned by instructor.


WORK--

  Each boy make at least three modifications in outline and decoration
  of project elected by class, or assigned by instructor.

  Rapid workers will finish any unfinished work.


GRADE VIII.

(MECHANICAL DRAWING)


=Lesson 12.=


RECITATION--

  Explain fully the manner of laying out and working a cylinder.

  How does a carpenter lay out a cylinder with the steel square?

  What is meant by modeling in woodwork?

  State the steps in laying out and working a hammer-handle.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 13--

  _Essentials_, Review Sections 71, 72.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Finish any unfinished work.

  Rapid workers make a full sized pattern of designed part and fill in
  decorative design.

  Make a dimensioned working drawing of the project designed last
  lesson.

  Make out stock bill for the same and figure estimate of cost on the
  reverse side.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VII.)


=Lesson 13.=


RECITATION--

  Screws--How made and sold?

  How is the size designated?

  How are blued screws made? What are the two kinds of screws?

  How are the wood parts prepared for wood-screws? In soft wood? In hard
  wood?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 14--

  _Essentials_, Read Sections 78, 79.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in making Dado Exercise.


WORK--

  All pupils square up exercise piece and begin making the joints.

  NOTE:--No definite size is required for exercise piece but it must be
  square and true.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VII.)


=Lesson 14.=


RECITATION--

  Dado? What is this joint used for? Grooves?

  Develop fully the steps taken in making the dado.

  Develop fully the steps taken in making the stub tenon and mortise.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 15--

  _Essentials_, Sections 73, 74, 75.


DEMONSTRATION--

  Talk on getting out stock. Look over small pieces first.

  Use narrowest boards that will do; 12″ boards are scarce; keep them
  for taboret tops, never use them for legs.

  Use try-square and straight-edge and saw to the lines carefully
  ripping first then crosscutting to the ripped part only. Leave on the
  board all but just what you need. Use your stock bill. If others are
  waiting for stock, saw only one piece and work on that while they are
  getting a piece. Watch your thicknesses. Never discard a piece that
  has been partly worked, without permission. Bevels or chamfers are
  made after joints. Mill-marks must come off before parts to joints are
  fitted; why?


WORK--

  Finish the exercise pieces, leave them on instructor’s desk to be
  graded and begin on Group VII--first choice.

  Instructor will want to see the pieces after the various steps.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VII.)


=Lesson 15.=


RECITATION--

  Glue? Of what and how made?

  Glue-pots? Describe. Why two pots?

  How prepare glue for use? Why soak it?

  How apply the glue? Thick or thin? Why warm the wood?

  Cold glues? Advantages and disadvantages? Why do they thicken and how
  thinned? In cold weather?

  Clamps? Why used? Two kinds?

  Names of four parts to hand clamp? How adjust?

  How could a good substitute be made for cabinet clamp?

  Why glue size end grain? What is glue size?

  Rubbed glue joint is how made?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 16--

  _Essentials_, Sections 147, 148.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Continue with Group VII Woodwork.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VII.)


=Lesson 16.=


RECITATION--

  Two reasons for putting finish on wood?

  Six kinds of materials used?

  Brushes? Of what made?

  Dusters? The edges of tracing brushes?

  Cleaning shellac brushes? Varnish brushes?

  Care of brushes from day to day?

  The best alcohol or shellac cans? Cans for delicate woods?

  Cleaning wire?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 17--

  _Essentials_, Section 149.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in using brush. Section 149.

  (That no point may be omitted have one boy with open book enumerate
  the steps, Section 149.)


WORK--

  Continue Group VII, Woodwork.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VII.)


=Lesson 17.=


RECITATION--

  State the seven steps in using a brush.

  Feathering strokes? What? How taken?

  Edges or surfaces first? Working out over edges?

  Picking up surplus liquid?

  What is the order in working finish on internal corner, panels,
  stiles, rails?

  Horizontal or vertical position preferred?

  Tracing? What?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 18--

  _Essentials_, Sections 150, 151.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in applying filler.


WORK--

  Continue Group VII, Woodwork.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VII.)


=Lesson 18.=


RECITATION--

  Fillers? Two kinds and their uses?

  Are fillers absolutely necessary? Explain.

  Liquid filler? How applied and where used mostly?

  Why is shellac used on close grained woods in fine cabinet work for
  first coat instead of filler or varnish?

  Paste filler? Of what made? The cause of contrasts in the grain of
  filled wood?

  Four steps in filling a coarse grained surface?

  How long ought filler to stand before applying other coatings?

  Caution about excelsior and rags used in filling?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 19--

  _Essentials_, Review Sections 152, 153.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Continue Group VII, Woodwork applying finish as needed.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VII.)


=Lesson 19.=


RECITATION--

  Three kinds of stains?

  Advantages and disadvantages of water stain?

  Advantages and disadvantages of oil stain?

  Advantages and disadvantages of spirit stain?

  How is water stain applied? How thinned?

  How is oil stain applied? How thinned?

  How is spirit stain applied? How thinned?

  Fumed oak? What is it and how obtained?

  Is waxing an old or new finish? How made by our ancestors?

  Advantages and disadvantages of wax finishes?

  State five steps in applying a waxed finish.


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 20--

  _Essentials_, Sections 154, 155, 156.


DEMONSTRATION--

  The essential points in shellacing preparatory to waxing.

  The order in producing a waxed finish with and without shellac; with
  and without water stain.


WORK--

  Continue Group VII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VII.)


=Lesson 20.=


RECITATION--

  The two kinds of varnish?

  Why do varnishes vary in price?

  What are rubbing varnishes?

  Necessary conditions for good varnishing? Why these conditions?

  Shellac? Where found? What is it? How prepared?

  Two kinds of shellac?

  White shellac, how made and where used especially?

  Orange shellac, advantages and disadvantages?

  Caution about applying shellac?

  Why is shellac sometimes used before varnish and wax?

  Describe method of producing egg-shell gloss shellac finish.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 21--

  Essentials, Section 113. Instructor explain the mounted specimens of
  wood illustrating tree structure.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Continue Group VII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VII.)


=Lesson 21.=


RECITATION--

  Tree structure? A tree is cut in three directions for study, what are
  they? How does each section lie?

  If a young sprout should be cut across what three layers of tissue?

  If tissue is magnified how would it appear to be composed?

  If the end of a log is examined how will it have changed from that of
  the sprout?

  Name six divisions of tissue of the log beginning at the center.

  What makes the rings and why are some light and some dark?

  Is a year’s growth composed of the dark or the light rings or both?
  Why are the centers of the rings sometimes out of the log’s center?

  General divisions of tissue are Pith, Wood, Bark.

  How is heart-wood formed? Its purpose?

  How is sap-wood formed? Its purpose?

  Where does the actual growing take place?

  What layers of tissue are on either side of the cambium?

  What is the inner side of the bark called?

  What is cortex?

  Medullary rays? Of what composed? Purpose?

  What makes grain in sawed lumber?

  Knots?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 22--

  _Essentials_, Section 114.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Continue Group VII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VII.)


=Lesson 22.=


RECITATION--

  What is the life blood of a tree called?

  Beginning with the tree in early spring, explain the movement or lack
  of movement of the sap.

  The effect upon the tree of the sap’s movement in the spring?

  What part do the leaves perform in the digestive process?

  Chlorophyll? Assimilation?

  The sap circulation from mid-summer to the end of summer?

  Effect upon the leaves?

  What becomes of the descending sap?

  Does the upward movement of the sap and the downward movement of the
  changed sap take place at the same time?

  Do the leaves drop because the sap descends or does the sap descend
  because the leaves drop off?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 23--

  _Essentials_, Sections 115, 116, 117. Instructor explain mounted
  specimens illustrating shrinkage.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Continue Group VII.

  Pupils, finishing projects in Group VII now, may get out stock and
  begin squaring it up for Group VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VII.)


=Lesson 23.=


RECITATION--

  Respiration is another name for breathing. How does it apply to
  plants?

  Animals breath in oxygen and breath out carbonic acid gas.

  How about plants?

  Carbonic acid gas is poisonous. Is it harmful to have plants in the
  house? Explain.

  How do trees breathe?

  Transpiration? What is it and where and why does it take place?

  What per cent. of living cell is water? Where is the water contained?

  Which has more water sap-wood or heart-wood?

  Which is stronger green or seasoned wood?

  Shrinkage? What makes a plank cut from a tree shrink?

  Could a plank shrink without having water in the interior of the
  cells?

  Explain why a plank shrinks across the grain but not along as the eye
  can see.

  Two reasons a log shrinks more along the rings than along the radii.

  The effect of this greater shrinkage along the rings?

  Which shrinks more, sap-wood or heart-wood? Effect on a plain sawed
  board? (On a quarter-sawed board?)

  Which shrinks more soft or hard wood?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 24--

  _Essentials_, Sections 118, 119, 120. Instructor explain mounted
  specimens illustrating grain formations--straight, curled, bird’s eye.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Continue Group VII.

  Pupils, finishing projects in Group VII now, may get out stock and
  begin squaring it up for Group VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VIII.)


=Lesson 24.=


RECITATION--

  What is the weight or specific gravity of wood? Oak or pine?

  Why does wood float then?

  Upon what two things does the weight of any given piece of wood
  depend? Does it ever vary? Why?

  Why are some kinds of wood heavier than others similarly seasoned?

  Is a heavy piece stronger than a light piece of the same size?

  What is meant by strength, elasticity, hardness, toughness,
  cleavability?

  What is meant by straight grain? Cross-grained? Twisted?

  Causes?

  What makes bird’s eyes in some woods?


PREPARATION FOR DEMONSTRATION; ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 25--

  _Essentials_, Sections 80, 81, 82.


DEMONSTRATION--

  Recall steps in squaring up rough stock, use of winding sticks and
  other tests.

  The essential points in laying out and working cross-lap joint by
  first method.


WORK--

  All pupils lay aside present work and square up stock for, and make,
  cross-lap exercise piece.

  When joint is completed finish any unfinished work of Group VII, then
  begin Group VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VIII.)


=Lesson 25.=


RECITATION--

  Cross-lap joint? Why plane stock for the two parts in one piece?

  What about the face marks in case this is done? Why?

  The difference in the two methods given?

  State the ten steps in making the joint by the first method.

  In the second method how are the grooves and their widths determined?

  What about the location of the grooves with reference to the faces?

  What about the faces in gaging for depth of groove? Why?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 26--

  _Essentials_, Sections 121, 122 to the bottom of page 130.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Finish exercise piece and continue as in lesson 24.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VIII.)


=Lesson 26.=


RECITATION--

  Lumbering? Two kinds and their differences?

  The camp; selecting trees; felling; trimming; cutting to length?

  Skidding?

  Transportation of logs to mill?

  By cars, splash dam, rafts, river driving.

  Milling? Location; log-booms; soaking logs in mill-pond?

  Three kinds of saws? Advantages and disadvantages of each?

  Timbers, planks, and boards?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 27--

  _Essentials_, Sections 122 continued, 123, 124.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Continue Group VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VIII.)


=Lesson 27.=


RECITATION--

  Lumbering? At the mill? The log-slide, inspection, measuring, kicking
  logs out of slip on log-deck.

  Sawing process in detail? 1. Log placed on carriage and dogged and
  slab with a few boards taken off. 2. A half turn and slab and few
  boards taken. 3. A quarter turn and nearly all sawed up. 4. Half turn
  and all sawed up.

  The live rolls? Edgers? Trimmers or jump saws? Butting saws?

  Slasher? It is used on slabs. What becomes of slabs?

  Quarter-sawing? Why and how?

  Why do quarter-sawed boards not warp like plain sawed?

  Uses for waste wood? Burners?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 28--

  _Essentials_, Sections 125, 126, 127.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Continue Group VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VIII.)


=Lesson 28.=


RECITATION--

  How is sawed lumber transported?

  Two methods of seasoning? Why and how stick lumber?

  Air seasoning? Time required? Depends upon what?

  Kiln drying? Why? Temperature of kiln?

  How do soft and hard woods differ as to methods of seasoning? Time
  required for each?

  Checks in hard wood? Why? How prevented?

  Case hardening? Why? How prevented?

  Clear lumber? Dressed lumber? Abbreviation for dressed lumber?

  How is lumber computed and sold? Shingles, lath, and moldings?

  How would you specify lumber in an order?


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 29--

  _Essentials_, Review Appendix III, Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and
  Sections 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 34.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Group VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VIII.)


=Lesson 29.=


REVIEW--

  Instructor will place six questions on the blackboard, selected from
  Assignment for this Lesson.

  Pupils will write the answers to five of these, making complete
  statements in each case so that the instructor will know what is being
  discussed without referring to the question list. Instructor will
  insist upon full sentences--subject and predicate--that the pupil may
  not form bad habits in his English. Have uniform headings. Insist on
  neatness.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 30--

  _Essentials_, Review Sections 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55,
  56, 57, 62, 63.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Group VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VIII.)


=Lesson 30.=


REVIEW--

  Instructor will place six questions on the blackboard, selected from
  Assignment for this Lesson.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 31--

  _Essentials_, Review Sections 76, 77, 14, 64, 58, 61, 71, 72.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Group VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VIII.)


=Lesson 31.=


REVIEW--

  Instructor will place six questions on the blackboard, selected from
  Assignment for this Lesson.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 32--

  _Essentials_, Review Sections 78, 79, 73, 74, 75, 147, 148, 149.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Group VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VIII.)


=Lesson 32.=


REVIEW--

  Instructor will give each pupil one question, for oral answer,
  selected from Assignment for this Lesson.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 33--

  _Essentials_, Review Sections 150, 151, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 113.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Group VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VIII.)


=Lesson 33.=


REVIEW--

  Instructor will give each pupil one question for oral answer, selected
  from Assignment for this Lesson.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 34--

  _Essentials_, Review Sections 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120,
  80, 81, 82.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Group VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VIII.)


=Lesson 34.=


REVIEW--

  Oral test from Assignment for this Lesson.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 35--

  _Essentials_, Review Sections 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Group VIII.


GRADE VIII.

(WOODWORKING GROUP VIII.)


=Lesson 35.=


REVIEW--

  Oral test from Assignment for this Lesson.


ASSIGNMENT FOR LESSON 36--

  This closes the text work for the year.


DEMONSTRATION--

  None.


WORK--

  Those finishing projects will assist slower pupils or do any necessary
  work about the shop such as making bench-hooks, scraping bench tops,
  etc. All pupils are to be kept busy at some work until the last day.
  The last week, each class will polish tools.


CHAPTER VIII.

LESSON OUTLINES FOR GRADE IX.


From the detailed outlines of the grammar school the high school
instructor will be enabled to detail his lessons to suit his time
allotment and periods of work.


GROUP IX.


FIRST WEEK:

  Review “Squaring up of Stock.” Rough and mill-planed. _Essentials of
  Woodworking_, Chapter III.

  Square up stock for joint exercises.

  Demonstrate mortise and tenon, keyed. _Essentials_, Sections 87, 88,
  89, 90, 91.

  Pupils make mortise and tenon, keyed.

  Recitation on same.


SECOND WEEK:

  Square up stock for exercise in mortise and tenon, blind, and miter
  joint.

  Demonstrate mortise and tenon, blind. _Essentials_, Sections 92, 93,
  94, 95, 96, 97, 98.

  Pupils make mortise and tenon, blind, and miter joint.

  Recitation.


THIRD WEEK:

  Prepare stock for modeling exercise.

  Demonstrate modeling--hammer-handle. _Essentials_, Section 61.

  Pupils make hammer-handle.

  Recitation.


FOURTH WEEK:

  Saw stock for glue joint. (Consult working drawings.)

  Demonstration of glue joint. _Essentials_, Sections 83, 84, 85, 86.

  Pupils make glue joints.

  Recitation.


FIFTH WEEK:

  Review getting out stock in quantity.

  Demonstrate use of Band-saw.

  Pupils get out stock for projects.

  Recitation.


SIXTH WEEK:

  Review “Laying out and Working Duplicate Parts.” _Essentials_,
  Sections 62, 77.

  Demonstrate Laying out and Working Duplicate Parts.

  Pupils proceed as their work allows.

  Recitation.


SEVENTH WEEK:

  Demonstrate use of Jig-saw.

  Pupils use Jig-saw as their work necessitates.

  Recitation.


EIGHTH WEEK:

  Demonstrate clamping framed structures.

  Pupils clamp as their work allows.

  Recitation.


NINTH WEEK:

  Preparation for “Finishing.” _Essentials_, Review Sections 147, 148,
  149, 150, 151.

  Demonstrate Preparation of surfaces for finish.

  Recitation.


TENTH WEEK:

  Demonstration of application first coats. _Essentials_, Sections 154,
  155, 156, 157, 158.

  Pupils apply finish as work allows.

  Recitation.


ELEVENTH WEEK:

  Demonstrate other finishing coats. _Essentials_, Section 159.

  Pupils proceed as work allows.

  Recitation.


TWELFTH WEEK:

  Demonstrate patching. _Essentials_, Section 160.

  Recitation.


THIRTEENTH WEEK:

  Study of Woods. _Essentials_, Sections 128, 129.

  Recitation.


FOURTEENTH WEEK:

  Study of Woods. _Essentials_, Sections 130, 131, 132.

  Recitation.


FIFTEENTH WEEK:

  Study of Woods. _Essentials_, Sections 133, 134, 135, 136.

  Recitation.


SIXTEENTH WEEK:

  Study of Woods. _Essentials_, Sections 137, 138, 139, 140, 141.

  Recitation.


SEVENTEENTH WEEK:

  Study of Woods. _Essentials_, Sections 142, 143, 144, 145, 146.

  Recitation.


EIGHTEENTH WEEK:

  Finish up.




PART III.

WORKING DRAWINGS.


PROJECTS FOR BEGINNING WOODWORK AND MECHANICAL DRAWING.


LIST OF PLATES.

GROUP I.

  1. Cutting board.

GROUP II.

  2. Counting board.
  3. Coat and Hat rack.
  4. Key-rack.

GROUP III.

  5. Ringtoss.
  6. Spool holder.
  7. Game board.
  8. Laundry register.

GROUP IV.

   9. Sleeve board.
  10. Bread board.
  11. Cake board.
  12. Scouring board.
  13. Coat hanger.

GROUP V.

  14. Nail box.
  15. Knife polishing box.
  16. Knife and fork box.
  17. Bird house.
  18. Broom holder.
  19. Bench-hook.

GROUP VI.

  20. Teapot blocks.
  21. Thermometer back.
  22. Calendar mount.
  23. Card holder.
  24. Bill file.
  25. Handkerchief box.
  26. Glove box.

GROUP VII.

  27. Groove joint.
  28. Book-rack.
  29. Necktie rack.
  30. Magazine rack.
  31. Footstool.
  32. Paper or magazine wall rack.
  33. Wall shelf.
  34. Table or desk shelves.
  35. Taboret.
  36. Stool.

GROUP VIII.

  37. Cross-lap joint.
  38. Book trough.
  39. Electric cluster.
  40. Electric table or desk light.
  41. Calendar mount or memo board.
  42. Hall rack or mirror frame.
  43. Picture-frame.
  44. Taboret.
  45. China wall rack.
  46. Pedestal.

SUPPLEMENTARY.

  47. Suggestive treatments for stool.
  48. Suggestive treatments for necktie rack.
  49. Suggestive treatments for book-rack.
  50. Introductory sheet, Drawing.
  51. Geometric sheet, Drawing.

[Illustration: GROUP I.

PLATE 1.]

  CUTTING BOARD

[Illustration: GROUP II.

PLATE 2.]

  COUNTING BOARD

  THRU BORE ³⁄₈″ HOLES AT +

  FROM ³⁄₈″ DOWEL STOCK SAW 3 PIECES EACH 1¹⁄₄″ LONG

  POINT THE ENDS ¹⁄₁₆″ EACH

[Illustration: GROUP II.

PLATE 3.]

  COAT AND HAT RACK

  ³⁄₁₆″ HOLES FOR SCREWS AT ×

  2¹⁄₂″ WIRE COAT HOOKS AT +

[Illustration: GROUP II.

PLATE 4.]

  KEY RACK

  ³⁄₁₆″ HOLES FOR SCREWS AT ×

  ³⁄₄″ BRASS CUP HOOKS AT +

[Illustration: GROUP III.

PLATE 5.]

  RING TOSS

[Illustration: GROUP III.

PLATE 6.]

  GAME BOARD

  FROM ³⁄₈″ DOWEL STOCK MAKE 32 PEGS

  POINT ENDS ¹⁄₁₆″ EACH

  SOLITAIRE--PLACE ALL PEGS IN THE BOARD--JUMP PEGS ONE OVER ANOTHER
  ALONG STRAIGHT LINES, HORIZONTALLY, VERTICALLY OR DIAGONALLY--PLAN THE
  PLAYS SO THAT THE FINAL PEG TO BE REMOVED WILL LAND JUMPER IN CENTRAL
  HOLE.

[Illustration: GROUP III.

PLATE 7.]

  SPOOL HOLDER

  POINT TOP OF EACH DOWEL ¹⁄₁₆

[Illustration: GROUP III.

PLATE 8.]

  LAUNDRY REGISTER

  AT EACH + BORE A ³⁄₁₆″ HOLE ¹⁄₆″ DEEP

  FROM ³⁄₁₆″ DOWEL STOCK SAW 10 PEGS 1″ LONG POINT THE ENDS ¹⁄₁₆″

  SHIRTS
  COLLARS
  CUFFS
  U-SHIRTS
  DRAWERS
  HANDK’FS
  SOCKS
  UNION-S’T
  PAJAMAS
  EXTRAE166

[Illustration: GROUP IV.

PLATE 9.]

  SLEEVE BOARD

  SECTION AT A-B

[Illustration: GROUP IV.

PLATE 10.]

  BREAD BOARD

  SECTION AT A-B

[Illustration: GROUP IV.

PLATE 11.]

  CAKE BOARD OR CROCK COVER

  SECTION AT A-B

[Illustration: GROUP IV.

PLATE 12.]

  SCOURING BOARD

  CROSS SECTION AT C-D

  TO LOCATE F¹ AND F²
  1. LOCATE POINT “D”.
  2. TAKE “R” = “O-B” AND
  DRAW. F¹E + EF² = AB

[Illustration: GROUP IV.

PLATE 13.]

  COAT HANGER

  SECTION AT A-B

  SWEEP ARCS = 16⁷⁄₈″ AND 27¹⁄₈″

[Illustration: GROUP V.

PLATE 14.]

  NAIL BOX

[Illustration: GROUP V.

PLATE 15.]

  KNIFE POLISHING BOX

[Illustration: GROUP V.

PLATE 16.]

  KNIFE AND FORK BOX

[Illustration: GROUP V.

PLATE 17.]

  BIRD HOUSE

[Illustration: GROUP V.

PLATE 18.]

  BROOM HOLDER

[Illustration: GROUP V.

PLATE 19.]

  BENCH HOOK

  RIGHT AND LEFT HAND

[Illustration: GROUP VI.

PLATE 20.]

  TEAPOT BLOCKS (BLANK MODEL--TO BE MODIFIED)

  SUGGESTIONS

  STOCK-³⁄₄″ THICK

[Illustration: GROUP VI.

PLATE 21.]

  THERMOMETER BACK (BLANK MODEL--TO BE MODIFIED)

[Illustration: GROUP VI.

PLATE 22.]

  CALENDAR MOUNT (BLANK MODEL--TO BE MODIFIED)

  DESIGNED BY GORDON KELLAR

[Illustration: GROUP VI.

PLATE 23.]

  CARD HOLDER (BLANK MODEL--TO BE MODIFIED)

  SUGGESTIONS

[Illustration: GROUP VI.

PLATE 24.]

  BILL FILE (BLANK MODEL--TO BE MODIFIED)

  30^d WIRE BOX NAIL

  GLUE

[Illustration: GROUP VI.

PLATE 25.]

  HANDKERCHIEF BOX (BLANK MODEL--TO BE MODIFIED)

  MODIFIED EDGES

  TOP-BOTTOM TOP-BOTTOM TOP

[Illustration: GROUP VI.

PLATE 26.]

  GLOVE BOX (BLANK MODEL--TO BE MODIFIED)

  MODIFIED EDGES

  TOP-BOTTOM

  TOP-BOTTOM

  TOP

  TOP-BOTTOM

[Illustration: GROUP VII.

PLATE 27.]

  GROOVE JOINT (PREPARATORY TO GROUP VII)

  GAGE SETTING

  GAGE SETTING

  SAW HERE

  DADO JOINT

  GAGE SETTING

[Illustration: GROUP VII.

PLATE 28.]

  BOOK RACK

  ENDS HOUSED INTO BASE ¹⁄₄″

  TO SCREW

[Illustration: GROUP VII.

PLATE 29.]

  NECKTIE RACK

[Illustration: GROUP VII.

PLATE 30.]

  MAGAZINE RACK

  ENDS HOUSED IN BASE

[Illustration: GROUP VII.

PLATE 31.]

  FOOT STOOL

[Illustration: GROUP VII.

PLATE 32.]

  PAPER OR MAGAZINE WALL RACK

  DETAIL OF SHELF

[Illustration: GROUP VII.

PLATE 33.]

  WALL SHELF

[Illustration: GROUP VII.

PLATE 34.]

  TABLE OR DESK SHELVES

[Illustration: GROUP VII.

PLATE 35.]

  TABORET

[Illustration: GROUP VII.

PLATE 36.]

  STOOL

[Illustration: GROUP VIII.

PLATE 37.]

  CROSS-LAP JOINT (PREPARATORY TO GROUP VIII)

  GAGE SETTING

  SAW KERF

  GAGE SETTING

[Illustration: GROUP VIII.

PLATE 38.]

  BOOK TROUGH

[Illustration: GROUP VIII.

PLATE 39.]

  WOODWORK FOR ELECTRIC CLUSTER

  CEILING BLOCK

[Illustration: GROUP VIII.

PLATE 40.]

  ELECTRIC TABLE OR DESK LIGHT

[Illustration: GROUP VIII.

PLATE 41.]

  CALENDAR MOUNT OR MEMO BOARD

[Illustration: GROUP VIII.

PLATE 42.]

  HALL RACK OR MIRROR FRAME

  10 × 18 MIRROR OR POSTER PICTURE

  ¹⁄₄ STOCK FOR BACKING

  HOOKS AT × FOR HALL RACK

[Illustration: GROUP VIII.

PLATE 43.]

  PICTURE FRAME

  PERRY PICTURES # 756 AND 757 SUGGESTED

[Illustration: GROUP VIII.

PLATE 44.]

  TABORET

[Illustration: GROUP VIII.

PLATE 45.]

  CHINA WALL RACK

[Illustration: GROUP VIII.

PLATE 46.]

  PEDESTAL

[Illustration: SUPPLEMENTARY.

PLATE 47.]

  SUGGESTIVE TREATMENTS FOR STOOL

[Illustration: SUPPLEMENTARY.

PLATE 48.]

  SUGGESTIVE TREATMENTS FOR NECKTIE RACK

  HOUSED JOINT

  DADO JOINT

[Illustration: SUPPLEMENTARY.

PLATE 49.]

  SUGGESTIVE TREATMENTS FOR BOOK RACK

  HOUSED JOINT

  DESIGN BY CLEVELAND ELEMENTARY IND. SCHOOL.

  DADO

  DADO

[Illustration: INTRODUCTORY SHEET, DRAWING.

PLATE 50.]

  ABCDEFGHIJKLMN

  OPQRSTUVWXYZ

  123456789

  90° 30° 60° 45°

  ABC

  0123

  ABC

  0123

[Illustration: GEOMETRIC SHEET, DRAWING.

PLATE 51.]

  HEXAGON

  SIX-POINT STAR

  OCTAGON

  ELLIPSE


ADVANCED PROJECTS IN WOODWORK.

LIST OF PLATES.

GROUP IX.

   1. Exercises--Keyed tenon; Blind Mortise-and-tenon.
   2. Exercises--Miter joint; Glue joint.
   3. Exercises--Modeling, Hammer handles.
   4. Necktie Rack.
   5. Foot Stool.
   6. Book Rack.
   7. Upholstered Stool.
   8. Leg Rest.
   9. Cricket.
  10. Wall Shelves.
  11. Stool (square).
  12. Taboret (octagonal top)
  13. Taboret (round top).
  14. Small Table.
  15. Taboret (oblong top).
  16. Piano Bench.
  17. Piano Bench.
  18. Book Stand.
  19. Umbrella Stand.
  20. Umbrella Stand.
  21. Jardiniere Stand.
  22. Magazine Stand.
  23. Roman Seat.
  24. Light Stand.
  25. Stool (square).
  26. Book Trough.
  27. Screen.
  28. Tea Table.
  29. Hall Rack.
  30. Wall China Rack.
  31. Side Chair.
  32. Arm Chair.
  33. Morris Chair.
  34. Electric Reading Lamp.
  35. Pedestal.
  36. Occasional Rocker.
  37. Mission Chair.
  38. Drop Leaf Table.

GROUP X.

  39. Exercises--Mortise-and-tenon; Rabbeted, Grooved.
  40. Exercises--Thru Multiple Dovetail; Half blind Dovetail.
  41. Waste Paper Box.
  42. Wall Cabinet.
  43. Telephone Table.
  44. Sewing Cabinet.
  45. Writing Table.
  46. Chafing Dish Stand.
  47. Cabinet.
  48. Library Table.
  49. Writing Desk.
  50. Dressing Table.
  51. Linen Chest.

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 1.]

  _EXERCISE (PREPARATORY TO GROUP IX)_

  _KEYED TENON_

  _BLIND MORTISE AND TENON_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 2.]

  _EXERCISE (PREPARATORY TO GROUP IX)_

  _GLUE JOINT-DOWELING_

  _MITER JOINT_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 3.]

  _EXERCISE PREPARATORY TO GROUP IX (CHOOSE ONE)_

  _HANDLE FOR BALL PEEN HAMMER_

  _HANDLE FOR CLAW HAMMER_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 4.]

  _NECKTIE RACK_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 5.]

  _FOOT STOOL_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 6.]

  _BOOK RACK_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 7.]

  _UPHOLSTERED STOOL_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 8.]

  _LEG REST_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 9.]

  _CRICKET_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 10.]

  _WALL SHELVES_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 11.]

  _STOOL_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 12.]

  _TABORET_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 13.]

  _TABORET_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 14.]

  _SMALL TABLE_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 15.]

  _TABORET_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 16.]

  _PIANO BENCH_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 17.]

  _PIANO BENCH_

  _DETAIL OF JOINT AT A-B ENLARGED_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 18.]

  _BOOK STAND_

  _END OF LOWER SHELF_

  _END OF MIDDLE SHELVES_

  _DETAIL OF JOINT AT A-B_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 19.]

  _UMBRELLA STAND_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 20.]

  _UMBRELLA STAND_

  _COPPER DRIP PAN_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 21.]

  _JARDINIERE STAND_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 22.]

  _MAGAZINE STAND_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 23.]

  _ROMAN SEAT_

[Illustration: PLATE 24.]

  _LIGHT STAND_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 25.]

  _STOOL_

  _DETAIL OF CORNER_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 26.]

  _BOOK TROUGH_

  _DETAIL OF TROUGH BACK_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 27.]

  _SCREEN_

  _MIRROR_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 28.]

  _TEA TABLE_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 29.]

  _HALL RACK_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 30.]

  _WALL CHINA RACK_

  _DETAIL OF A-B_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 31.]

  _SIDE CHAIR_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 32.]

  _ARM CHAIR_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 33.]

  _MORRIS CHAIR_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 34.]

  _ELECTRIC READING LAMP_

  _SECTION AT A-B_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 35.]

  _PEDESTAL_

  _EGG AND DART_

  _SECTION AT A-B_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 36.]

  _OCCASIONAL ROCKER_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 37.]

  _MISSION CHAIR_

[Illustration: GROUP IX.

PLATE 38.]

  _DROP LEAF TABLE_

  _DETAIL OF JOINT AT A-B_

[Illustration: GROUP X.

PLATE 39.]

  _EXERCISE--PREPARATORY TO GROUP X_

  _MORTISE and TENON-RABBETED_

  _HAUNCHED MORTISE AND TENON-GROOVED_

  _SAW KERF_

  _SAW KERF_

[Illustration: GROUP X.

PLATE 40.]

  _EXERCISE--PREPARATORY TO GROUP X_

  _THRU MULTIPLE DOVETAIL_

  _HALF-BLIND DOVETAIL_

[Illustration: GROUP X.

PLATE 41.]

  _WASTE PAPER BOX_

[Illustration: GROUP X.

PLATE 42.]

  _WALL CABINET_

  _DETAIL OF SHELF AT A-B_

[Illustration: GROUP X.

PLATE 43.]

  _TELEPHONE TABLE_

[Illustration: GROUP X.

PLATE 44.]

  _SEWING CABINET_

[Illustration: GROUP X.

PLATE 45.]

  _WRITING TABLE_

[Illustration: GROUP X.

PLATE 46.]

  _CHAFING DISH STAND_

[Illustration: GROUP X.

PLATE 47.]

  _CABINET_

[Illustration: GROUP X.

PLATE 48.]

  _LIBRARY TABLE_

[Illustration: GROUP X.

PLATE 49.]

  _WRITING DESK_

  _COMMERCIAL DESIGN_

[Illustration: GROUP X.

PLATE 50.]

  _DRESSING TABLE_

[Illustration: GROUP X.

PLATE 51.]

  _LINEN CHEST_

  _SECTION AT A-B_




  Transcriber’s Notes


  Depending on the hard- and software used and their settings, not all
  elements may display as intended. Some forms, tables and illustrations
  may not display properly in a narrow window or on a narrow screen.

  Except as mentioned under Changes made below, the language used in the
  source document has been retained, including unusual, archaic and
  inconsistent spelling, hyphenation, capitalisation, etc. Errors,
  discrepancies and ambiguities in (cost) calculations have not been
  corrected unless mentioned below.

  Page 78-79, price calculations: The source document gives .00 for the
  price of the chisel-board.

  Page 110, (Mechanical Drawing 12 weeks ...: there is no closing
  bracket in the source document.

  Page 211, Plate 24: the Group number is not included in the caption.


  Changes made:

  Illustrations, forms, tables etc. have been moved out of text
  paragraphs.

  Some obvious minor punctuation and typographical errors have been
  corrected silently. × and x in multiplications and dimensions have
  been standardised to ×. In several forms and tables some of the ditto
  marks (“) have been replaced with the dittoed text. Some wide forms
  and tables have been split.

  Part III: project names, project part names and construction
  instructions from the drawings have been transcribed for the sake of
  clarity and legibility; measurements and descriptions of minor
  constructive elements such as screws and nails have only been
  transcribed when needed. The most important text elements from the
  illustrations in the text chapters have been transcribed as well.

  Page 38, caption with Fig. 4: October 1808 changed to October, 1908

  Page 128-129, Heading Woodworking Group VIII considered to be part of
  heading Grade VIII as on previous pages.

  Page 155: STOCK-³⁄₄′ THICK changed to STOCK-³⁄₄″ THICK

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CORRELATED COURSES IN WOODWORK
AND MECHANICAL DRAWING ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
